Despite losing 2-1 to TP Mazembe in the first leg of the CAF Confederation Cup final today, SuperSport United’s hopes are still alive going into Saturday’s second leg at home. The away goal could be the deciding factor on Saturday as they need a 1-0 victory to lift the trophy. Playing the defending champions in front of their home supporters was always going to be a daunting task but United showed great determination and fighting spirit despite coming second best. But there is still all to play for on Saturday and this tie is far from over. United went into the break trailing 1-0 after allowing Adama Traore to shoot from distance. The visitors had their chances, too, with Bradley Grobler missing what would have been the opening goal earlier after a good cross from Thusa Phala. United started on the offensive and never allowed the hosts to dictate terms early on. However they were let down by indecisiveness and poor decision-making in front of goal. This allowed Mazembe to rally back and with the capacity crowd cheering their every move they came out of their shells and took the game to the visitors. They were rewarded in the 18th minute when goalkeeper Ronwen Williams fumbled Traore’s shot and this sent the crowd into frenzy. The supporters wanted more as they could sense United were no pushovers. The South Africans pushed hard to get the equaliser and again came close in the dying minutes of the opening half with Mazembe goalkeeper Ley Matampi collecting the ball after a goalmouth scramble. United wanted the advantage of an away goal, knowing it would make life easier at home on Saturday. And they got one when Sipho Mbule equalised just after the break. However they were again caught napping at the back when Daniel Adjei scored what would ultimately be the winning goal. Despite missing four influential players – Morgan Gould, Reneilwe Letsholonyane, Teboho Mokoena and Thabo Mnyamane – United played like a unit and were never intimidated by the hostile crowd. They were taunted and threatened with a massive scoreline, but never let it go to their heads as they played their normal game. In fact they played much better than the hosts and deserved something from this game. But it is not over yet as there is still 90 more minutes of action to go. They will be relying on the home crowd and South Africans’ support to push them to win this competition.