Mduduzi Manana has been sentenced to a fine of R100 000 or 12 months imprisonment, anger management classes, and 500 hours of community service. Manana has to pay the amount by noon tomorrow. He also has to compensate the victims for the medical expenses which they incurred as a result of the assault against them. The former deputy minister of higher education and training was appearing at his sentencing for three charges of assault with intent to perform grievous bodily harm. Video footage, which was widely circulated on social media, showed him attack three young women at the popular Cubana lounge in Fourways. His sentencing was handed down in courtroom one at the Randburg Magistrates’ Court this afternoon by Judge Ramsamy Reddy. On Thursday, Reddy heard closing arguments by prosecutor Anne-Marie Smith and Manana’s defence lawyer, Michael Motsoeneng Bill. Bill had argued for Manana to be given a 12-month suspended sentence for five years, that Manana be fined R100 000 and that he complete 500 hours of community service. Read: Manana’s lawyer wants community service, R100K fine for Cubana assault Smith had cautioned Reddy not to lose focus, and that the severity of Manana's and his co-accused's actions on the night of August 6 proved that, as grown men, they should be held accountable. Bill argued that Manana was referred to as an “isitabane” on the night of the attack, a derogatory term used to refer to someone as gay, and that the victims had conceded that alcohol had a role in the attack against them. Today, the courtroom was filled to the brim with student ANC supporters, who all felt that Manana should not have been sentenced to a jail term. Reddy noted that despite the severity of Manana’s actions, which had taken place during Women’s Month, Manana had proven himself to be a “constructive citizen of society”, because he had taken responsibility for his actions by enrolling in counselling sessions to deal with his anger. Once Reddy handed down his sentence, Manana turned to his family who were seated in the front row and winked at them while he smiled in relief. Soon afterwards, the student supporters broke out into song. A scuffle broke out outside court between the ANC supporters and Economic Freedom Fighters members, who wanted Manana to be sentenced to jail time.    