Italian jazz master Nicola Conte is en route to South Africa for a series of live performances set to sonically seduce audiences. Beleza, an independent global music events collective that aims to bring quality music to Africa and showcase South African music across the globe, has handpicked local musicians of the highest class – including Conte – for a tour of the country. City Press spoke to Conte as well as a few of his band mates ahead of the series of performances. Conte, who has been brought in for the first Baleza festival, has an extensively diverse catalogue, which makes it difficult to box his sound into one genre. His music is fundamentally well rounded but lends itself well to innovation and playful creativity. “It is a spiritual sound, but if I was attached to a genre, perhaps jazz with Afro influences and soul,” he explained. A classically trained musician born in Bari, Italy, Conte is a guitarist, composer, conductor, DJ, producer and former leader of the legendary “The Fez Collective” in his home country. Conte released his first album, Jet Sounds, 16 years ago. He followed up with six brilliant albums – with his latest, Natural, a Latin jazz collaboration with Stefania Dipierro in 2016. Conte and the organisers of Baleza have handpicked a live band for the South African tour that consists of Gianluca Petrella on trombone and Logan Richardson on saxophone and he will also perform with Nduduzo Makhathini, Zoe Modiga, Thuto Motsemme, Tumi Mogorosi, and Tlale Makhene. Sidney Mavundla will present his own project in Durban with Thandi Ntuli and DJ Bubbles. Menlyn will host Conte on Saturday at what is to be the crescendo of his tour. He will also take to the decks at the Kaya FM sound supreme picnics launch on the same day. The Italian, who spoke as rhythmically as you might expect an Italian to, emphasised the spirit of the players as being crucial to the sound. He and his band took time out to dine in Yeoville so they could get to know each other properly before their performances. Asked what the crucial element in making timeless music is, he said: “The appreciation of certain elements, subtle feelings in the rhythm and a good choice of voicing. A natural feel is key so as to connect the listener to an emotion.” His views on the dominant sounds of our time? “It is always difficult to approach such a wide state of things but the state is divided. One side is the commercial, plastic, empty music mostly done to get teenagers in. It exploits the artists and audience. The alternative you have is a flourishing of interesting sounds like jazz, avante garde, indie rock, elctronica, contemporary hip hop. This is the side keeping things alive.” He added that these are not the greatest of times for music. “The media puts pressure on artists to release a certain sound, massively imposing on the people which gives me the feeling of emptiness.” Bass maestro Motsemme said: “I’m very excited and honoured to be working with great artists especially Nicola who has a great outlook.” Motsemme is from KwaMashu in KwaZulu-Natal. His musical journey started out with him singing in choirs and messing about in his bedroom. He has been playing for 16 years or so. He commented on working with Conte, “Everybody has their own approach to life and music. I’m hoping to pick up on different thought processes. We spoke about our thoughts and views of the world at dinner. He is open minded and all of us together have so much flavour.” Smooth jazz vocalist Modiga said the experience had been a rewarding one. “This is his first trip to Africa. I have realised that he is quite interested in music in a cultural context. He feels Africa is his home musically, and he’s intrigued by the idea of home.” Conte was very particular about spending time with the musicians before they performed. Modiga enjoyed this approach. “As with everything I’m a part of, I would like for us to stay connected. It is great to meet up with people and play because we actually get into each other’s lives,” he said. Percussionist Mogorosi, from the East Rand of Johannesburg, has been playing for 17 years and also had humble beginnings as a musician starting out in community centres and the like. This revered marshal of the rhythm section said: “It has been interesting to experience his awareness and openness to allow people to contribute. I think their needs to be more open channels, a dialogue that can encourage collaboration. Being able to talk to people from elsewhere is vital to growth.” Beleza will reach its conclusion tomorrow at Menlyn shopping mall. Tickets are available at ticketpros.co.za.