The office of the premier in the Eastern Cape reacted with shock that a case of arson was withdrawn at the Zwelitsha Magistrates’ Court today. This was after two low-level workers at the premier’s office, who appeared briefly in court on Friday and were suspects in the arson case, had the charges against them withdrawn by the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) due to lack of evidence. The arson case was a result of a fire that broke out at the offices of Premier Phumulo Masualle in Bhisho during the afternoon of June 30. On the same day there had also been fire at Premier David Makhura’s offices in Gauteng. This caused hysteria as the two incidents were thought to be related. But it turned out the Gauteng case was an accident. However, in the Eastern Cape situation it was believed to have been deliberate as the section, a garage attached to the office of the premier, contained piles of documents which were said to have been part of ongoing investigations on procurement. The damage caused by the fire is estimated to be worth R25 million. Mandisa Titi, spokesperson for the office of the premier, said they found it “interesting” that the case had been withdrawn and hoped that authorities would still work hard to find out what had led to the fire. She said all the documents that were destroyed in the fire were retrieved as they had already been captured electronically before the fire broke out. “Fortunately every piece of paper that was in the garage was already secured electronically before the fire. "Whilst the case has been withdrawn against the two gentlemen we are hoping that police will continue investigating until they find the real culprits,” Titi said. Tsepo Ndwalaza, the NPA spokesperson, said the case had to be withdrawn due to insufficient evidence and that the NPA could not continue with prosecution. He said this did not necessarily mean it was the end of the case. “A withdrawal of a case does not mean it cannot be reinstated once enough evidence that is convincing and can stand in a court of law is found. "All we know at this stage is that there is really no evidence there to take this matter forward. We cannot go ahead with something we know won’t work in court. "But if something tangible comes up, we can always reinstate the case,” Ndwalaza said.