It is finally here. We should have seen this one coming, or maybe we did but turned a blind eye because we feel almost powerless. After all, we marched to unseat President Jacob Zuma, which did not do much – he most likely laughed (hehehe) at our attempt with a “now, this is entertainment” comment to his fellow ANC members behind closed doors. A few months ago, South Africa was downgraded to “junk” status, and now we’ve been hit with recession – there seems to be no break in sight for this country that we love. So what do we do now? Recession means tough times. We need to make some changes so that we do not completely feel the effects of this crisis, and there are some things you can try. Firstly, pay off any debts because owing money is never a good thing or something to brag about. Start with your local tuck shop – pay the outstanding balance you’ve run up after buying your daily loaf of bread, cigarettes and chewy sweets. Also, let it sink in that you now pay R2 for only one Chappies, not 50c for five! Try to remain free of debt and pay off all your store accounts when possible. I know it sounds crazy not to buy new clothes every week or month, but think of the savings. Your “rags’’ will have to do for now. Secondly, unemployment is high and many workers get retrenched because businesses tend to suffer in a recession, so it’s a good idea to try to create multiple income streams. With the internet, it’s easier than you think these days. If you have some sort of skill, you can simply market it online. For example, if you can burp the alphabet, you’ve struck gold – companies could use your marketing skills. Lastly, reduce your expenses immediately. Sit down with the family and explain to them that take away food is off the menu for the foreseeable future. Make good choices in the supermarket – you may need to let go of your favourite brands and head for the no-name products instead. Yes, some weird peanut butter that is so sticky you could plaster your house with it is still peanut butter. The bottom line – stop spending and start saving.