Ordinary South Africans will have a say on how political parties are funded and how they should account for the funds received from the public purse.The multiparty special parliamentary committee established to enquire into and make recommendations on funding of political parties represented in national and provincial legislatures held its first meeting yesterday and unanimously decided that the public will be invited to submit views on the proposed model to adequately fund political parties, regulate private funding and to ensure transparency and accountability. The public comment period opens next week and runs until July 21. There will also be a public hearing (oral submissions) process after that.Vincent Smith of the ANC, who was elected chairperson of the ad hoc committee, said the exercise will try to ensure the strengthening of accountability, transparency and the protection and enhancement of South Africa&rsquo;s democracy. &ldquo;I think it&rsquo;s those things more than just increased funding. I think it&rsquo;s important that we ensure our product (of the exercise) is such that the voices and interests of the electorate are not diluted by undue influence exerted by private funders who look after their narrow interests,&rdquo; said Smith. The committee was established earlier this month to also consider the model of public and private funding for political parties; and the need for, and possible means of, regulating private funding in all its forms as well as investment entities owned by political parties. Tabling the motion to establish the committee on June 6, ANC chief whip Jackson Mthembu said political parties require adequate funding in order to perform their functions and enhance democracy, and that the manner and transparency of such funding are paramount in the context of building public confidence in the political system. Last month, Mthembu announced during a party press conference that the ANC in Parliament will support disclosure on private political party funding. But in a carrot and stick scenario, the party linked this transparency and disclosure of private donations to increased support from the national coffers.Since the dawn of democracy, political parties across the spectrum have been united in refusing to open their books. Mthembu revealed that in the 2017/18 financial year, public funding for political parties amounted to just under R150 million and was proportionally allocated to political parties. In addition to this fund, members of legislatures were funded by the respective institutions. Both monies from the legislatures and the Represented Political Parties&rsquo; Fund &ndash; which is administered by the Independent Electoral Commission &ndash; may only be used for specific activities and must be accounted for. Mthembu described the R150 million as &ldquo;negligible&rdquo; for political parties to do their political work. &ldquo;We are very far from the ideal.&rdquo;Currently political parties are not required to declare sources of their funds or how they use their money.Mthembu was adamant that the ANC proposal would also address concerns raised by civil society on the lack of transparency of party funding. The committee has to report back to the National Assembly by November 30.