South Africans can’t seem to catch a break. Over the past few years, we have seen interest rates increasing tremendously, unemployment increasing and continuous political scandals that keep shaking our already unsteady economy, and news of the Gupta email leaks with information showing that our president is acquiring a very expensive mansion in Dubai. To be honest, we are fed up! Over the last week, we have learnt that South Africa has officially hit a recession. This brings on more predicted ratings downgrades which, in turn, puts more pressure on the average citizen. With investments declining and living expenses increasing, it seems like we are heading into a tough stretch. Basic needs such as food and transport have seen consumer cuts. Our economy is continuously weakening, the South African rand is in a volatile state and it makes living day-to-day very difficult. I am an immigration consultant, and speak with young professionals and skilled workers daily. What is shared time and time again is their feelings of uncertainty. The professionals who are supposed to keep this country moving forward cannot seem to find jobs and, if they do, the job doesn’t cover living expenses. Many of them are frustrated. They want to be able to invest their knowledge and talents in a workforce where they will get recognition and the ability to support themselves – now and, more importantly, in the future. At this time, unfortunately, South Africa is not offering the young, skilled workforce what they need to build a future. This is why many of them are seeking our assistance in moving abroad. We focus on skilled migration to Canada and Australia. These two countries are offering permanent residency to those who can offer their skills and knowledge to their workforce and fill a gap in their working economy. There are many shortages in their workforces and not enough skilled locals to fill these gaps. South Africans have always been a favourite among the skilled immigrants coming into these countries. What can you expect from these countries? • A steady economy; • Job stability; • Political security; • State benefits – free healthcare, social security, pension and free public education for children; and • Future growth. It comes as no surprise why our talented, young adults are seeking options abroad. It seems like the grass is greener on the other side (for now).