President Jacob Zuma visited Lusikisiki in the Eastern Cape yesterday after a recent spate of violence crime, especially against women and children. The community of Lusikisiki is living in fear of a notorious gang known as Amavondo, members of which allegedly kill people and then drink their victims blood.Zuma was joined by Police Minister Fikile Mbalula, Justice Minister Michael Masutha, Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini, Eastern Cape Premier Phumulo Masualle and his MEC, and a number of deputy ministers.The president started his visit by stopping over at a new state-of-the-art police station, which was built just outside the town of Lusikisiki in New Rest. This facility is very modern. Even the holding cells inside are very strong. I don t think anyone can try to run away. They even showed me that there is hot water, which is benefit of democracy. Before that, you would not find any hot water in police stations, he said while addressing the media on the steps of the new building.He said the new police station was a great example of service delivery in a place where there was high crime rate, and that the new facility would work well to fight crime in the area.The president said the new police station would be supported by mobile police stations due to the size of Lusikisiki, which has many rural villages.Addressing an imbizo in Zalu village outside Lusikisiki, Zuma, who also chaired the programme and listened to the views of community members, said his visit was part of government s Siyahlola Presidential Monitoring Programme. We got reports from many people from here saying crime has escalated. I spoke to someone on the phone who is from here in Lusikisiki, saying that the community was being terrorised by the infamous Amavondo gang, he said. So, today, I am here with the police minister to assess what is happening in terms of crime and other government programmes. All spheres of government are here to hear firsthand what the issues are. As government, it is our duty to get closer to the people and hear what their problems are, Zuma said.