Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa has called for a focused commission of inquiry to deal with state capture allegations that are in the public domain to restore confidence in state owned enterprises and for those implicated to clear their names. This comes weeks after a number of ANC MPs aligned to President Jacob Zuma requested the public protector to broaden the state capture investigation to include Treasury, the SA Reserve Bank, the Financial Intelligence Centre, the Public Investment Corporation and the Financial Services Board, without informing their party bosses. The MPs are accused by some of their comrades of trying to dilute the looming inquiry into Gupta-linked state capture by asking that the inquiry also look at certain financial institutions, including National Treasury.Ramaphosa was answering questions in the National Assembly on Wednesday when he said he was not aware of any commentary that would make this process [state capture investigation] an endless one, particularly following the Public Protector report. &ldquo;This is supposed to be a focused process,&rdquo; he said.Ramaphosa was responding to a request for comment from the ANC&rsquo;s Mondli Gungubele who said there was a view that the pronouncement by the ANC on state capture and on the commission of inquiry was &ldquo;a ploy&rdquo; to make the investigation general, to confuse the Public Protector&rsquo;s recommendations, or to render the process an endless one. Ramaphosa said he hoped the terms of reference for the judicial inquiry will be broad enough for state capture to be properly analysed and investigated in all its ramifications to make sure the truth in the end does come out. He said the ANC was not trying to make this process long and complicated. &ldquo;It wants it to be as focused as possible and to happen as quickly as possible,&rdquo; he added.Responding to EFF&rsquo;s Hlengiwe Maxon, Ramaphosa said he supported the establishment of a commission of inquiry into state capture because of all these allegations that are being made. He added that those who are affected should welcome an opportunity to go before an independent inquiry to clear their name and to put their case. &ldquo;Every one whose name has been mentioned and those with any evidence should welcome the idea of going to the inquiry to present themselves. It&rsquo;s important for those who have been mentioned to go there and clear their names &hellip; even those who have not been mentioned,&rdquo; he added.Ramaphosa wouldn&rsquo;t answer whether Zuma&rsquo;s resignation would be the best way to prevent the manifestation of state capture. &ldquo;We know the answer to the question is yes,&rdquo; said DA MP David Maynier. &ldquo;Why not say yes?&rdquo;A smiling Ramaphosa repeated that an inquiry into state capture would be a great opportunity for all, and those whose names have been mentioned could explain their actions or lack of action. This, he said, affected everyone including himself and his colleagues. But he sprung to Zuma&rsquo;s defence when DA MP Michael Cardo asked if he regarded Zuma as a selfless and accountable leader who could steer South Africa along a developmental path.&ldquo;President Zuma has been honoured by the continent to chair the infrastructure development trajectory of the continent. This, the continent did out of an informed realisation of how South Africa, as led by President Zuma, has been able to change the infrastructure trajectory of our country and move it forward. &ldquo;Look at the record as has been achieved of the infrastructure layout and development that has taken place in our country &ndash; it is second to none. Let us give due regard and respect where it is due,&rdquo; said Ramaphosa.