It seems that President Jacob Zuma is steadfast on the position which the ANC holds in the country, judging from his heated reply to DA leader in today&rsquo;s question-and-answer session in parliament. When Mmusi Maimane questioned Zuma about the current economic state the country faces, with particular reference to the job losses and lack of faith around the ruling party, Zuma told Maimane not to &ldquo;create this impression that the ANC is losing power&rdquo;. &ldquo;Come 2019 you will fail. The fact of the matter is that the people still believe in the ANC. "You must be careful because you have to get help from other parties, yet the ANC is still strong,&rdquo; Zuma said.He referenced the DA and EFF&rsquo;s recent coalition, and the sudden lashing which the EFF has been giving the DA as a result of the party&rsquo;s inability to tackle the controversy surrounding Western Cape Premier and DA member Helen Zille&rsquo;s colonialist tweets. &ldquo;The EFF has even threatened you and yet you still think the ANC is the problem?&rdquo; he asked, as MPs shook their heads around him. &ldquo;I am absolutely certain that the country did the right thing by voting me in as president because I have been doing a great job,&rdquo; Zuma said firmly. Among other issues raised was the topic of the nuclear deal, which was also posed by Maimane. &ldquo;Will the government commit to pursue any future nuclear deal with maximum transparency given the opportunity for wide-scale corruption?&rdquo; Maimane asked. &ldquo;Yes, the government is still intent on pursuing the nuclear new build programme at a pace and scale that the country can afford, as part of the general energy mix that we are pursuing in order to ensure energy security for the country."The energy mix also includes hydro, solar, coal, wind and gas,&rdquo; was Zuma&rsquo;s response. Although he faced a tough question-and-answer session, Zuma still laughed jovially as MPs went on the rampage, with some even challenging for an early election in order to prove just how powerful the ANC really was.