Actress Lunathi Mampofu has nailed her character as Zikhona in the SABC1 drama series Ingozi, sending social media into a frenzy. The die-hard lover of arts has been trending on social media and viewers have been nodding approvingly about her convincing role. She has attributed her success to the “pioneering women” in the arts before her, who open the doors and broke through the glass ceiling under difficult circumstances. Mampofu lived in New York and Los Angeles while studying performing arts at the New York Film Academy. “I was assistant casting director there and I had my best life,” she shared. However, she decided to come back home to share the experience and knowledge obtained in the United States. She said she always believed that “home was where one always wants to be the best with the craft”, and said that she wanted to prove her worth at home first. “All we need to do is to tell our stories as South Africans,” she said. On her return to SA, she played a spiritualist in an episode of the Mzansi Magic drama series Isikizi. Later last year, she was given the character of Zikhona in the SABC1 drama series Ingozi, which she described as opening doors for her in other spheres in the entertainment scene. She also scored television gigs on e.tv (South Africa Ambition), on Grit for BET Africa, and was the leading lady in a Kotex commercial. She said she was not ready yet to reveal her next step in the industry and was keeping her fans salivating for news. “People must just wait to see the good,” she quipped. She took the opportunity to advise young people who want to be in the limelight to “go to school first” and ensure they are equipped because “fame comes and goes”. The 30-year-old actress also admitted that her family’s obsession with the arts industry has had a major influence on her life. It has given her a foundation that prepared her for the demanding and challenging industry. The Eastern Cape-born actress said she was inspired by seeing her brothers who are actors – twin brother Oros and Prince Mampofu – hogging the spotlight. They were often tailed by journalists wanting to profile their work. “I knew from when I was very young that I’d end up in one of the arts categories,” she said. The actress used to perform at school and participated in various competitions that drew the attention of the media. This threw her into the limelight at an early age. She holds a live performance degree from the South African School of Motion Picture Medium and Live Performance (also known as Afda). She recalled how during her first year at Afda, she featured in Duncan Angus’s feature film Mercy and in 2010 I had a role in the film The Good Man which was shot in South Africa and Ireland. “Since that first role, I have never looked back.”