Samsung began its Galaxy Note 8 press conference in New York in the US on Thursday by vowing that it had addressed the Note 7 battery’s US$5.4 billion (R71 billion) disaster, which resulted in some of these phones exploding. For their part, fans declared their loyalty to the brand on social media. The South Korean electronics giant has installed a new eight-point battery safety check on all new devices, following the Note 7 fiasco that led to a global recall and cost the company dearly in profits. The newest Galaxy boasts a 6.3-inch screen with a wraparound infinity display, first seen on the Samsung S8. It is arguably the most interesting feature on any mobile device in recent years. Given the ample screen space, users can launch two apps simultaneously in a split-screen mode via Apps edge, which displays your most frequently used apps for access at a moment’s notice. Unlike any other handset, the Note 8’s stylus S-Pen, slots into the device. It has a finer tip with improved pressure sensitivity, ideal for scribbling over pictures on the new Live Message feature. Custom graphic interchange formats, better known as GIFs, can be created and shared instantly through social media or messaging. Using the stylus, text can be highlighted for real-time translations and currency and unit conversions based on a preset language, currency or measurement. Notes can be taken directly on the screen without unlocking it, for up to 100 pages.  In addition, the new Note 8 is capable of intensive multitasking, browsing and streaming. It comes equipped with a whopping six gigabytes of rapid access memory (RAM) and 64GB of onboard storage, expandable via microSD – a removable flash memory card used for storing information. The new dual-lens cameras have optical image stabilisation on both lenses, making it a first for a mobile device. The 12 megapixel main camera features a wide angle and telephoto lens, both of which are capable of background-blurring bokeh effects under Live Photos. A bokeh refers to the quality of the blur when an image is taken out of focus. Depth of field can be adjusted in real time before the shot is taken. Features carried over from the S8 include water- and dust-resistant capabilities, fast wireless charging, biometric security and a desktop mode (DeX) available as a separate accessory. Samsung recently launched its virtual assistant, Bixby, with voice commands. Having gone live in South Africa on August 22, Bixby will work with the new Note 8. It understands cross-application commands such as: “Send the picture just taken to mom.” South African consumers can buy the Note 8 from September 22 at the recommended retail price of R18 499. Pre-orders open on September 1. – @nafisa1