Arbiter of the supreme law of the land Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng has been appointed as the new chancellor of the University of KwaZulu-Natal.Mogoeng&rsquo;s appointment was announced by the university&rsquo;s council chair Dr Vukile Mehana on Thursday.Mogoeng will occupy the office for four years and he will be the third chancellor of the university.Mogoeng succeeds Dr Zweli Mkhize, ANC treasurer-general, who served a four-year consecutive term of office.Another ANC veteran and former National Assembly speaker, Dr Frene Ginwala, served as the first chancellor of the university in 2005.Mehana welcomed Mogoeng&rsquo;s appointment.He said the university was fortunate to have the eminent chief justice serve as chancellor and looked forward to interacting with him in this critical role. Mehana also thanked Mkhize for his distinguished service to the university.Chancellor&rsquo;s role University spokesperson Indu Moodley said in terms of the university statute the chancellor was the titular head of the university.Moodley said a chancellor presides over all congregations.A chancellor confers all degrees and awards all diplomas and certificates at graduation. Mogoeng will also perform such functions as assigned to him by the council of the university. Moodley said the tenure of the chancellor may not exceed two consecutive terms of office.Mogoeng&rsquo;s qualifications and career Mogoeng is the fourth chief justice of the country. He holds BJuris and bachelor of law degrees from the Universities of Zululand and Natal respectively. He also holds a master of law degree from the University of South Africa. Mogoeng started his professional career as a temporary interpreter and was appointed as a high court prosecutor in Mafikeng from March 1986 to February 1990. Mogoeng did his pupillage at the Johannesburg bar and practised as an advocate at that bar from June 1990 until the end of 1991. He left to join the Mafikeng bar from January 1992 and later served as the deputy chairperson of that bar association until he was elevated to the bench. In June 1997 he was appointed a judge of the North West High Court and, in April 2000, a judge of the Labour Appeal Court. He was elevated to the position of judge president of the North West High Court in October 2002. In 2009, he was appointed to the Constitutional Court of the country and was subsequently elevated to the position of chief justice in September 2011. He also chairs the Judicial Service Commission, South African Judicial Education Institute Council and National Efficiency Enhancement Committee. Mogoeng is also one of the vice-presidents of the Conference of Constitutional Jurisdictions of Africa.