On an epic two-day trip to the Limpopo bush, Travel Torque’s Melinda Ferguson feels blessed to experience both the luxurious and tough capabilities of the new Land Rover Discovery. Rating: 5 stars Pricing Entry Level: Discovery S TD6 – R989 918 Top of the Range: Discovery First Edition Si6 -– R1 473 802 Few companies have got it as right as Land Rover when choosing modern day David Livingstone and intrepid explorer, Kingsley Holgate to be brand ambassador for the manufacturer of some of the world’s finest on and off-road vehicles. Living the brand to the absolute limit, dubbed the “most travelled man in Africa”, Holgate is almost synonymous with the legendary Land Rover Defender, now out of production, in which he has led his African and world expeditions, over the last four decades. But it is the new Land Rover Discovery that Holgate will be rocking on his next leg of humanitarian adventures and it was at the recent launch of the fifth generation Disco, that I got to meet the grey wild-haired traveller in the flesh. Under an ink black, star-speckled sky in the wild Marakele National Park, Limpopo, Holgate kept a bunch of usually attention-challenged journalists enthralled. Brand synergy danced under the moon, as he grasped his talking stick, and regaled us with tales of adventure, passion and discovery.  Launched last year at the Paris Motor Show, the new Discovery is all about mind-blowing tech, class-leading offroad capabilities, and enhanced design. Available in two engine options, there’s the impressive 3.0-litre turbodiesel engine with 190kW and 600Nm of torque, and a powerful 3.0-litre supercharged V6 petrol engine, with a cracking 250kW of power and 450Nm of torque. Both engines are mated to an eight-speed automatic transmission. If you’re interested in the nitty gritty of the range, there’s the entry level S, the mid range SE, followed by the HSE. Topping the range is the truly stunning but rather pricy HSE Luxury. There’s so much on offer in the new Disco but some of my favourite features en route to Limpopo were the impressive air suspension and the nifty 10.2-inch InControl Touch Pro infotainment system, which is mated to a kickass Meridian sound system. But it’s the Tow Assist and Trailer Stability Assist offered as standard, as well as the optional Advanced Tow Assist system, with a maximum towing capacity of 3500kg that got me really going. Gone are the days when hooking a trailer or a boat will entail calling your neighbour to help. If you happen to find yourself in a river, the new Disco is able to wade in water up to 900mm deep and ground clearance tops at 283mm. Space-wise, there’s room for seven full-sized adult passengers, configurable from your smart phone using a world-first remote Intelligent Seat Fold Technology. Once folded flat, you can literally move your house in, with a massive 2500 litres of cargo space. Plus there’ll be no more squabbling over charging points with six 12-volt charging points, nine USB ports and a fabulous in-car Wi-Fi hotspot for up to eight devices. Out in the glorious bush, with no signal on our phones, the in-car Wi-Fi became a lifesaver for us bunch of Instagram-obsessed journos. As tough as the Disco was on the challenging offroad terrain, what was just as impressive was the interior refinement and luxury on offer, making this premium SUV the perfect city family car with unrivalled safety tech. Around the cracking campfire, as the big white-bearded pirate of travel spoke under the African sky, describing the call of humanitarian adventures, “as a thud to the heart”, where he and his team deliver life-saving mosquito nets to malaria-infested areas in Africa, Wi-Fi and charging points were forgotten. 