ANC treasurer-general Zweli Mkhize has called for the financial services sector to be used to unlock transformation in other sectors. Addressing the annual convention of the SA Institute for Black Property Practitioners (SAIBPP) at Houghton Gold Club in Johannesburg last week, Mkhize said the sector had the potential to transform other industries and break monopolies. “Key among the areas, which needs to be in the forefront of this debate for radical economic transformation, is the financial services sector. That is because this is the sector that basically controls literally all the resources that need be invested in a way that would help us to find new investors and areas of investors,” Mkhize said, adding that the financial services needed to focus on investments in the township economy, among other things. Mkhize said the R5.8 trillion-worth property sector had only 10% of the people controlling more than 80% of the resources and more space needed to be made for more players. He said the banking and asset management sectors, as well as the audit firm industry, needed urgent attention to break the monopolies that existed in them and that has seen a shocking lack of distribution. “You go to the asset management industry where [there are] R7 trillion worth of assets and 32 black people only control R360 billion,” Mkhize said, addressing an audience that also included SAIBBP CEO Vuyiswa Mutshekwane, president Nkuli Bogopa and Public Works Minister Nkosinathi Nhleko. In his speech, Nhleko said government has had to develop the Property Management Empowerment Policy (PMEP) after the industry charter and various other efforts proved “sluggish”. “Despite the adoption and implementation of the charter and the strategy, transformation of the property sector remained sluggish; hence, we resorted to a review of our BEE strategy that culminated in the PMEP. The policy will encourage ownership of properties leased to the department from the private sector, by transformed, exempted micro-enterprises and qualifying small business enterprises that will be majority-owned by previously disadvantaged groups.” he said.   