An afternoon of celebration and praise for women achieving great things took place on Friday afternoon at Summer Place in Illovo, when the intimate 2017 Fairlady Women of the Future Awards in partnership with short-term insurer Santam took place. Now in its third year, the awards always coincide with Women’s month. Former Miss South Africa and MC for the event, Jo-Ann Strauss, said to the mostly female guests that “feminism is not women against men. It is women who are for women”. These words could not have been truer, as all the finalists applauded and cheered each other on – a sign that women support is at an all-time high, despite the ongoing challenges that women in business face. This year’s judges included successful business-minded women, including Santam executive head of people and transformation Jeanett Modise; Advocate Thuli Madonsela; media entrepreneur and international speaker Jo-Ann Strauss, jewellery designer and businesswoman Kirsten Goss and Fairlady editor Suzy Brokensha. Modise said that it’s important as women to be able to support one another. Brokensha told City Press that this year’s entries increased by 100%, an indication that more women are getting into business. Leanne Manas, Claudia Henkel, Thembisa Mdoda, and current Miss South Africa Demi-Leigh Nel-Peters were among the A-list celebrities who were in attendance. But celebrities aside, what makes the Fairlady awards unique is that readers are able to purchase tickets to this prestigious annual event, and ardent readers of one of the country’s most well-loved magazine, mother and daughter duo Rose and Moloko Dikotla journeyed from Limpopo to attend the luncheon awards. “I have been a Fairlady reader for about 40 years now, and I am so glad to be able to attend this. I love Fairlady and what they speak to me about. As a government employee it’s important to see women shine in business,” said 57-year old Rose. As the afternoon’s proceedings took place with profile-videos of each finalists, the starter course was served – which included a meze tower of layered tomato, sweet onions, mozzarella and grilled aubergines. For mains, a fair-sized salmon was served with a pea mash and roast veggies while vegetarians opted for a creamy porcini, portabella and brown mushroom tortellini in a sage butter sauce. Dessert included a chocolate marquise, which was served as Strauss announced the winners. Tiffini Wissing Hein, owner of Old School Cool, won the Fairlady Woman of the Future 2017 title, for their flagship service Cool (kids) Cabs for children of swamped, over-scheduled parents. Anele Mkuzo-Magape walked away as the Fairlady Rising Star of 2017, and there was not a dry eye in sight as she was led to the stage by her mother who wiped her tears away. She is the founder of the African Entrepreneurship Initiative, a consulting service that allows the youth of our country to access financial literacy and entrepreneurship education. Prizes included R50 000 and R20 000 for each winner respectively and Michel Herbelin watches worth R10 500 each. 