Speaking at a press conference today where he was welcomed by fans and family, after landing from Zürich in Switzerland where he added another gold to his galaxy of medals, world long jump champion Luvo Manyonga said he enjoys entertaining young stars that is the reason he does his famous “dab” in the podium. “I was in Zurich and there were these three boys who drove five hours to come and watch me,” he said. “I see myself as role model to the young stars not the elders, that’s why I was doing those dabs just to entertain the young people. To see that there is happiness in sport, if they can do sport and enjoy it at the same time, there is no stress.” Manyonga who is a recovered drug user said he entertains people to show there is life after the darkness. Manyonga and 800m world champion Caster Semenya were in top form on Thursday evening, adding the International Association of Athletics Federations Diamond League crowns to the respective world titles they won at the London World Championships. Middle-distance runner Semenya who will is yet to return to the country, and Manyonga both won their specialist disciplines at the first of two finals in the Diamond League series. Manyonga was dominant, holding off countryman Ruswahl Samaai, who grabbed second spot. He won with a fourth round effort of 8.49m, while Samaai, who will arrive tomorrow, managed 8.31m had to settle for the runner-up spot behind his compatriot. Manyonga joins Khotso Mokoena and Semenya as the only South African athletes to have won Diamond League titles in any discipline. “I don’t focus on Luvo’s past, who we were it doesn’t matter, what matters is what we become,” said Manyonga’s coach Neil Cornelius. Cornelius said he his focus was the future. When asked how he is going to be in the next few years Manyonga replied: “I will be very good,” as the crowd burst into laughter. For the next six weeks he will be resting while also celebrating his success with family in Cape Town. Semenya will arrive on Tuesday at 8.30am.