On August 20 the United Democratic Front would be celebrating its 34th anniversary had it opted to continue with its political programme. The UDF was formed in 1983 to unite hundreds of progressive organisations and to coordinate protests and revolts against the vicious system of apartheid, particularly the 1983 new apartheid constitution and the subsequent elections to the segregated tri-cameral Parliament in 1984. It repeated its appeal to the white community “to help build a South Africa free from apartheid and violence”. Despite operating within a restrictive, terrifying, hostile, harsh and dangerous political atmosphere, the UDF succeeded in coordinating and leading a formidable, coherent and principled mass opposition movement inside the country. During its tumultuous eight years of existence (1983 to 1991), the UDF managed to take the message of unity, hope and freedom to all the country’s streets, to all community structures, to every household, and to all remote and isolated villages. Its strengths were top quality communication, engagement and accountability which inspired confidence, passion and trust within its formations and members. At a time when South Africans are experiencing a breakdown of trust and hope in politics and government, when there is turmoil within the ANC and Tripartite Alliance, when racism and tribalism rear their heads again, and when civil society movement break ranks with the ANC, there are several remarkable lessons that the ANC can learn from the UDF’s commitment to mandate, democracy, diversity, leadership and transparency. The UDF’s policies and programmes of action were delivered within the principles of mass democratic movement. The “mass” component of the mass democratic movement was rooted in the view that the masses were the major vehicle for the national democratic revolution rather than great individuals. Organisations that form part of the UDF were firmly based on grassroots structures and building from the recognised needs and aspirations of local people. Every decision made by the UDF was discussed at length at community level, as a result gathered widespread support. The “democratic” component emphasised democratic practices that were decided through open discussions. Power within the UDF was decentralised to grassroots levels through meetings, consultations and representatives, and all was done to encourage mass mobilisation, effective representation, collectivism, unity and mass ownership of the liberation struggle. The UDF utilised intra-party democracy as a tool to promote internal debates and self-criticism, nurture members’ political competencies and to produce more capable leaders and representatives which in turn ensured that the UDF produced better political policies, programmes and systems. “The remarkable manner in which the UDF managed the internal strains and stresses which often threaten to blow it apart is rare in front organisations. That we managed to remain united after the bruising debate of December 1983 referendum suggests a high and almost incredible degree of mutual tolerance amongst UDF leaders and activist,” said former UDF secretary Popo Molefe. And “movement” referred to the massive support the UDF’s programmes were enjoying from a broad spectrum of community sectors, namely unions, media, academics, business, labour, church, youth, women, traditional leaders, sports and civil society at large. The UDF valued diversity – cultural, racial, regional, gender, age, ideological – as strategic abilities and flexibilities to read and react appropriately to political dynamics as well as economic and social challenges. The way in which the UDF coordinated several hundreds of organisations that had never worked together before proved an amazing organisational skills and ability. “The UDF provided a broad organisational framework and a symbolic coherence to political resistance. It helped to build an unprecedented organisational structure from the local to the national level, it coordinated diverse protests and campaigns, and it nurtured a political culture that emphasised democratic rights,” writes Prof Jeremy Seekings in the book titled The UDF: A History of the UDF in SA, 1983 – 1991. Again, UDF leaders showed us that to be a principled, strategic, disciplined, strategic and listening leader; a nation builder, a peacemaker and an activist devoted to the most honourable cause of all – serving others and providing honest and humble leadership. UDF leaders emphasised organisational prosperity, resilience, discipline and dedication to the struggle in the face of extreme repression and brutality by the apartheid regime. The ANC needs to foster throughout its ranks a new kind of cadre rooted in the UDF’s mass democratic movement principles and tradition of servicing the people selflessly. “The UDF unites and apartheid divides” – this is how the UDF will always be remembered. •Thabani Khumalo is an independent political analyst based in Durban.