The SABC has left suspended Ligwalagwala FM station manager Vusi &ldquo;Rio&rdquo; Mabunda confused about whether he has been fired or given a final written warning.The disciplinary committee finalised its hearing last week and recommended that Mabunda should be given a final written warning. However, SABC Mpumalanga manager Quinton Lenyai gave Mabunda a dismissal letter. Mabunda &ndash; a popular radio personality who started as the station&rsquo;s breakfast show host &ndash; was suspended more than a year ago on six charges.Last week he was found guilty on two charges for failure to ensure that valid or written partnership agreements were in place and for refusing to return an SABC tablet.City Press has seen both the disciplinary committee&rsquo;s verdict and Lenyai&rsquo;s letter. Although the committee, chaired by Simon Molaudzi, said that Mabunda should be dismissed on the two charges, it also contradicts itself and says he must be given a final written warning.&ldquo;Given the aggravation and mitigation matters,&rdquo; reads the committee&rsquo;s verdict, &ldquo;the panel recommends a sanction of final written warning.&rdquo;Mabunda has since lodged an appeal against his dismissal.SABC spokesperson Kaizer Kganyago said that Mabunda had been dismissed. &ldquo;It is not true that Lenyai changed the decision of the disciplinary committee. [He] just implemented the decision. Mabunda was dismissed and he decided to appeal the matter,&rdquo; Kganyago said.Other than the contradiction in the verdict, Mabunda&rsquo;s appeal will be based on the fact that he spent eight months on suspension before he was charged and that the process of the hearing was flawed. The committee allegedly closed the process of leading evidence before Mabunda had led his on all the charges. Lenyai&rsquo;s clash with Mabunda has angered community members and SABC staff say they are demoralised by his leadership style. Last month, Lenyai had to lay intimidation charges against community member, Geoffrey &ldquo;Manyovu&rdquo; Mnisi, and Residents&rsquo; Association of South Africa president, Rasheed Matola.Mnisi led a social media campaign and a march of community members to the SABC offices early last month, demanding that Lenyai resign and reinstate Mabunda.Matola wrote to Lenyai requesting a meeting about Mabunda&rsquo;s suspension, allocation of airtime to the ANC more than other parties and various grievances raised by staff members as well as mismanagement and maladministration issues.SABC staff members have accused SABC management of double standards for not suspending Lenyai even though he was under investigation for allegedly cancelling a cancelling contract in order to benefit a company where his wife used to work.The employees claim that Lenyai often threatened staff with dismissal and forced journalists to cover certain stories.