In an unprecedented move, opposition leader Mmusi Maimane has called for Parliament to be dissolved, in terms of Section 50 of the Constitution, in order for there to be an early election. Section 50 states: &ldquo;If the National Assembly is dissolved in terms of section 50, or when its term expires, the President, by proclamation must call and set dates for an election, which must be held within 90 days of the date the Assembly was dissolved or its term expired. A proclamation calling and setting dates for an election may be issued before or after the expiry of the term of the National Assembly.&rdquo; Maimane was speaking at a press briefing in Parliament today, after yesterday&rsquo;s eighth motion of no confidence vote saw President Jacob Zuma remain at the helm, but by a smaller margin. READ:&nbsp;ANC MPs turn on Zuma but he survives&ldquo;We are sure that the ANC has lost the confidence of the majority of South Africans. We say, bring it on. Let&rsquo;s fight an election for the future of our country, and let&rsquo;s do it now. By the time Jacob Zuma has destroyed the ANC completely, and the country, it will be too late. Let&rsquo;s let the country choose a new beginning, now,&rdquo; Maimane said. This appears to be a part of the DA&rsquo;s strategy going forward, after at least 26 ANC MPs voted against the party in yesterday&rsquo;s vote. 198 MPs voted against the motion yesterday.The motion for an early election will be tabled in Parliament tomorrow &ldquo;and we will ensure it is debated and voted on as soon as practically possible,&rdquo; Maimane said.In addition to the motion, the DA will still be pursuing the charges which have been brought against Zuma. &ldquo;We will see him in court next month - on September 14 &amp; 15, where he will have to defend himself in the Supreme Court of Appeal against the 783 charges of fraud, corruption and racketeering he still faces,&rdquo; he said. Speaking to City Press, acting DA spokesperson Graham Charters said that based on yesterday&rsquo;s no confidence vote, the ruling party is &ldquo;in complete disarray&rdquo;. &ldquo;The ANC under President Jacob Zuma does not hold the mandate of the people anymore. We are now seeing that Cabinet ministers are voting against President Zuma and this shows a clear divide within the ANC. It&rsquo;s about time South African&rsquo;s go to the polls and get a fresh mandate,&rdquo; Charters said.