Mourners made their way to the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation, some bringing flowers, others offering a hand of support to staff.The struggle stalwart, who was affectionately called &ldquo;Uncle Kathy&rdquo; or &ldquo;Mr K&rdquo; by those close to him, died at the Wits Donald Gordon Hospital this morning.City Press caught up with some of the mourners at the foundation&rsquo;s offices in Lenasia, Johannesburg.Veena Naidoo, secretary of the Tamil Federation of Gauteng, said she worked closely with Kathrada in the community, setting up ANC branches before the 1994 election. &ldquo;He was a great human being. He saw no race, colour or gender. He was an inspiration for all of us and by his principles and with many others we got freedom today.&rdquo;She said her personal experience with Uncle Kathy was his humility. &ldquo;He was a warm-hearted person. He was always among people, interacting with ordinary people. He was not a man concerned about his status in society.&rdquo;Kathrada participated in community initiatives, including the Mahatma Gandhi walks, even in his old age.&ldquo;He was even involved in Fees Must Fall protests. You wouldn&rsquo;t say he was 87 years old,&rdquo; Naidoo said.Wits academic Caryn Abrahams-Erasmus, who a researcher at the foundation, said she came to offer a helping hand. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m on leave so I came to see if I can help with anything, maybe answering phones or emails. I&rsquo;m hoping to offer a warm welcome as people come in to pay their tributes. "Uncle Kathy was a grandfather to me &ndash; in fact to all of us. He considered us as his family.&rdquo;ANC member of Parliament Tasneem Motara, who wore a foundation &ldquo;support&rdquo; tag, said she came to assist staff. She said Kathrada was humble and interacted with everyone. &ldquo;He was a great man and every time I met him he would tell me a story about his experiences.&rdquo;Shavani Naidoo, a 27-year-old community activist, knew Uncle Kathy from an early age. &ldquo;I grew up in front of him. He was one of the role models in my community. It&rsquo;s heartbreaking that he is no more. He was one of our own.&rdquo;The Siyazama Thina Cooperative does community uplifting programmes in Loli Two, Fine Town and Madyasana informal settlements south of Gauteng. The cooperative&rsquo;s secretary-general, Thanduxolo Zonke, said he was saddened by Kathrada&rsquo;s passing. &ldquo;It came at a time when we were starting to build relations with him through the foundation. We wanted to have his work and that of the foundation known by poor communities. "We were about to plan to have discussions about issues of race and other matters that affect our communities.&rdquo;Zonke said they would continue working with the foundation. &ldquo;We want our poor people to learn from him and to also benefit from their programmes. The foundation is known overseas but people in the informal settlements don&rsquo;t know about their work and that of this great man. "We want our communities to understand that burning infrastructure when protesting is not going to solve problems. We need to keep what we have,&rdquo; Zonke said.The foundation&rsquo;s media officer, Delani Majola, said they were expecting more several civil society groups and people to arrive. &ldquo;What we are getting is that this is happening everywhere &ndash; at his flat where he used to stay, at the Nelson Mandela Foundation where the media briefing was held and at his home. Young people are also offering their support.&rdquo;City Press also visited Kathrada's flat in Killarney where several dignitaries including deputy president Cyril Ramaphosa, ANC NEC member Jessie Duarte and Penuell Maduna among others paid their condolences.