The chicken industry is not taking the European Union&rsquo;s accusations of &ldquo;structural problems&rdquo; lying down, and said it was a &ldquo;misperception&rdquo; that the local chicken industry did not do enough to save itself. Kevin Lovell, of the South African Poultry Association, told the parliamentary portfolio committee on agriculture, forestry and fisheries that the industry is actually &ldquo;highly effective&rdquo;. He quoted a study conducted by the University of Wageningen in the Netherlands about how much feed was used in various countries to produce a kilogram of chicken. South Africa needed 1.68kg of feed to produce a kilogram of chicken &ndash; less than in most countries and less than the average of 1.79kg. He also quoted a report by the Bureau for Food and Agricultural Policy. According to the report, South Africans used less feed because the chickens are slaughtered when they were younger. The older (and therefore heavier) a chicken was when it is slaughtered, the more feed it needed. Lovell said South Africans should treat Europeans and Americans the same way they treated us. If there is bird flu in South Africa, for example, the Europeans send inspectors to make sure the epidemic is over before they import meat from South Africa again. But when there is bird flu in Europe, South Africa trusts Europe when they say the disease is over. &ldquo;We should follow the Gigaba approach,&rdquo; said Lovell, in reference to Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba&rsquo;s announcement that South Africa would require visas for New Zealand citizens. This came shortly after New Zealand announced such a requirement for South African citizens. Scott Pitman, managing director of RCL Foods, responded to allegations that the local industry could do more to help by exporting more chicken. He said other countries protected their own industries, which made it difficult to export chicken to those nations. The reason Europe exported more to South Africa was because it couldn&rsquo;t export to other countries, said Pitman Russia banned imports to protect its local chicken industry, China began its own chicken industry, and Nigeria and Kenya banned chicken imports. Namibia instituted quotas 18 months ago, Zimbabwe and Botswana no longer imported chickens and for Mozambique you needed a special permit.It was also difficult for South Africa to stand up to Europe, because it was a big export market, while South Africa was not a big export market for Europe. In the meantime, the International Trade Administration Commission of South Africa must finalise its investigation so the department of trade and industry could decide if it should implement the provisional protective tariff of 13.9% on chicken from Europe permanently. The provisional tariff was announced on December 15. European countries were accused of selling chicken in South Africa at cheaper prices than in Europe and they were dumping it here. The meat that was sold in South Africa was the brown meat (like chicken legs) that was not popular in Europe. In reaction to the provisional tariff, Cecilia Malmstr&ouml;m, the EU&rsquo;s trade commissioner, wrote to Rob Davies, the South African minister of trade and industry, to say that the South African industry had &ldquo;structural problems&rdquo; that affected its competitiveness. In reaction to that, Sapa wrote to the EU, quoting the research from the University of Wageningin.In the letter, Sapa accused the EU of contributing to misery in South Africa by killing employment opportunities.