Appeal to investors, clamping down on money laundering ... Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa has a lot of nice things to say about the Financial Intelligence Centre bill. But he also has things to say about fake news and his business interests.Ramaphosa was responding to oral questions in the National Assembly on Wednesday, when he was asked about the FIC bill by Economic Freedom Fighters MP Floyd Shivambu, who wanted to know from Ramaphosa if he was aware that Mzwanele &ldquo;Jimmy&rdquo; Manyi had made claims to the effect that the FIC bill, once signed into law, would make it difficult for the ANC to obtain funding for its election campaigns. Ramaphosa lauded Parliament for passing the bill, and had this to say about it:1. The ratification of the piece of legislation will enhance South Africa&rsquo;s stature in the international investor community.2. President Jacob Zuma will keep in mind that MPs are urging him to sign the bill into law as a matter of urgency.3. The ruling party abhorred money laundering and therefore supported the FIC bill and applauded everyone who voted in favour of it. &ldquo;The ANC, for its finances, does not rely on money that is filtered into the country by money laundering or financing of terrorist activities. We abhor money laundering,&rdquo; Ramaphosa said.4. Ramaphosa had said this in response to Shivambu&rsquo;s question. Manyi argued during the public hearings that the bill targeted politically influential people and infringed upon their ability to do business. &ldquo;If it is true what Jimmy Manyi said, I have no idea what he was talking about. He is definitely not talking on behalf of the ANC that I lead and I know,&rdquo; Ramaphosa said.5. In January, the ANC Youth League accused both Ramaphosa and Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan of trying to collapse South African Airways opening the way for company linked to the deputy president would benefit financially. Inkatha Freedom Party MP Mkhuleko Hlengwa, asked Ramaphosa whether he was ready to call out the league for spreading &ldquo;fake news&rdquo;.&ldquo;I have told them that the matter they raised publicly was a lie, was a fabrication and as you say, fake news, because there is no truth that I am conducting business with SAA or any other company,&rdquo; he said.