President Jacob Zuma must follow the wishes of the dead and resign, says Julius Malema.The Economic Freedom Fighter commander in chief told journalists at the funeral of struggle stalwart Ahmed &ldquo;Uncle Kathy&rdquo; Kathrada that it was time for Zuma to step down.Kathrada wrote an open letter to Zuma last year calling for him to consider stepping down.His letter was also quoted by former deputy president Kgalema Motlanthe.While delivering an eulogy at Kathrada&rsquo;s funeral, Motlanthe said that Zuma never formally responded to Kathrada.#KathradaFuneral Standing ovation as Kgalema Motlanthe echoes Kathrada's wishes for Zuma to step down pic.twitter.com/gOPfsGb7QwZuma did not attend the funeral, citing that those were the wishes of Kathrada&rsquo;s family. Read: Zuma honours family&rsquo;s wishes with his absence at Kathrada funeral Malema said Zuma had to respect the family&rsquo;s wishes. &ldquo;We know how Uncle Kathy felt about the president and we were encouraged by [former] president Kgalema Motlanthe, who spoke the truth and described the last wishes of Uncle Kathy. "In African tradition the wishes of the dead must be respected and Uncle Kathy&rsquo;s wish was that the president must step down and he is a true Africanist. "He will respect the wishes of the dead.&rdquo;Malema said Kathrada and other struggle veterans had left a rich legacy for the current generation to learn from.&ldquo;There will not be hopelessness and a situation where we will not have a way out on situations we are confronted with today. "They have taught us to speak truth to power. They have taught us to be honest and to always express ourselves without fear or favour."Because of those teachings we will find a lasting solution to what is confronting South Africa today. Uncle Kathy is such a leader who left us with that type of legacy. "We are happy that he lived among us and we could learn from him directly. We did not get his wisdom from books but directly from him.&rdquo;Malema said he would follow Kathrada&rsquo;s wishes and pay his respects by visiting Robben Island in August.When he began his eulogy, Motlanthe warned that he would not &ldquo;mince words&rdquo;.He said Kathrada was a towering moral icon. Motlanthe said Kathrada viewed his criticism of Zuma and the ANC as a precondition for the sustenance of democracy.&ldquo;The ANC may disappear if it fails to embrace self-reflection.&rdquo;He said without self-reflection, individuals deteriorated.However, when interviewed by reporters, ANC secretary-general Gwede Mantashe said Zuma was not bound to respond to Kathrada&rsquo;s open letter. &ldquo;It is an open letter. It&rsquo;s published in newspapers. The president read it there as well. There is nothing stopping veterans, even today, from walking into Luthuli House and telling us to toe the line on any subject. There is no need for an open letter. There is a need for them to tell and guide us.&rdquo;Mantashe said by writing an open letter Kathrada had &ldquo;achieved what he wanted to achieve and there was nothing right or wrong in politics&rdquo;.ANC veteran Andrew Mlangeni walked into Luthuli House every day to seek clarity on issues, he said.&ldquo;That makes a big difference in the sense that you give him an answer face to face, you engage, you apologise and move on.&rdquo;Asked how he felt about statements released by 101 ANC veterans, Mantashe said he felt that he was shouted at.&ldquo;Once you shout your views, the target is not me but the public. I prefer to be guided. We have quite good meetings with the veteran stalwarts and that needs to continue but every time it gets out of hand and it becomes a shouting match I get disappointed. "I prefer to be guided and I&rsquo;m offering that we should be guided. That will help us. They must take up from where Kathrada stopped and continue.&rdquo;Earlier, Mantashe told mourners that Kathrada was incorruptible, not only in politics but in his personal life.South African Communist Party general secretary Blade Nzimande said the party agreed with concerns raised by Kathrada. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s unfortunate that he lived at a time when parasitic patronage networks sought to capture the movement for their narrow ends.&rdquo;Cosatu general secretary Bheki Ntshalintshali said Kathrada belonged to all South Africans.He said Kathrada had the courage to write to Zuma and let him know that things were not right. &ldquo;Leaders will come and go but organisations remain. No matter how popular you are never for a moment think you are bigger than the organisation.&rdquo;It was revealed by the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation that Uncle Kathy wished to support Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan in his case against the Guptas this week.Gordhan received a standing ovation from mourners when asked to stand up by the foundation&rsquo;s director, Neeshan Balton.Balton said irrespective whether or not Gordhan would remain a minister, he remained true to the values and principles that Kathrada would be proud of.