The country’s road networks are set to get a break, with ArcelorMittal South Africa (Amsa) announcing that it has opened a distribution centre in Isando, Gauteng. Amsa said this means that 672 000 tons of products will be moved from road to rail and that Amsa’s spending on Transnet Freight Rail (TFR) will increase by R104,8 million per year. The new initiative will remove about 42 000 trucks from the country’s roads per annum. It is expected that Transnet’s market share for outward bound steal per rail will grow by 13% in 2017 to 34% by 2018. Amsa eventually wants 1 million tons of freight per year to be moved to the rail network for transportation to distribution centres, where it will be exported to the Durban and Richard’s Bay harbours and, among others, Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia. Rail freight is more cost effective for the steel producer, but Amsa also said it will spare the road network, advance road safety and is more environmentally friendly. According to the South African National Roads Agency Limited (Sanral), overloaded trucks cause more than R1 billion worth of unnecessary damage to roads every year. The opening of the Isando distribution centre comes amid concerns in the steel industry about difficult trading conditions and logistical costs. Marius Croucamp, deputy secretary of trade union Solidarity, which represents 28 000 members in the steel and engineering sector, said the steel industry lost more than 11 000 posts in 2015. Croucamp has previously asked for protective tariffs to be placed on imported steel, because the industry is on the verge of collapse as a result of declining demand, higher overheads (such as electricity) and the dumping of steel products in South Africa because of oversupply on the international market. The International Trade Administration Commission is expected to make a decision in this regard by the end of the month. Solidarity said it would be catastrophic for communities if the steel industry fails. In the Vaal Triangle and Newcastle, about 66% of employment is maintained by the industry and in Saldanha 25%. Willemien Viljoen, a researcher associated to the organization Tralac, which campaigns for trade capacity, said the steel industry had already brought five successful applications to raise the import tariff on various steel products. “The bleak picture painted by industry has, to date, successfully ensured protection for primary steel products in South Africa.” She however pointed to opposing viewpoints that it’s not just cheaper imports that are causing the industry’s problems. The finger should also be pointed at aging production equipment and technology, local producers who can’t meet demand and, in certain cases, the poor quality of locally manufactured steel. There are also accusations of anti-competitive behaviour. Croucamp said localization would help the local industry. For this reason, Solidarity welcomes government’s decision that 100% of structural steel, which will in the future be used in infrastructure products, will come from local markets.