Kehlani: SweetSexySavage R159.99 on iTunes 3.5/5 Rhodé Marshall gets 90s R&B nostalgia while listening to Kehlani’s debut album, SweetSexySavage 2017 is possibly going to go down as the year of US singer Kehlani Parrish. Her seductive debut album, SweetSexySavage, is a multifaceted mission statement that captures the diversity and divinity of being Kehlani, a woman in control of her own narrative. “My condolences to anyone who has ever lost me and to anyone who got lost in me,” 22-year-old prose artist Reyna Biddy recites on the intro of the album. “Or to anyone who ever felt they took a loss with me. My apologies for the misunderstanding or the lack thereof.” Her next line, retweeted over a thousand times on Twitter, quickly became a quote accessory for women’s Instagram and Twitter bios alike: “I’m sorry you missed the God in me.” These stirring vocals are the perfect collaboration between two young artists on an album that represents three important layers of womanhood – being sweet, sexy and savage. Kehlani explores self-assurance and sexuality (she’s openly bisexual), navigating through genres including neo-soul, R&B, trap and pop. Kehlani’s sound dabbles in 90s R&B with modern pop melodies. Personal and Advice are intimate celebrations of individual growth; Undercover and Distraction have continuous rhythmic sounds with bold eroticism; and on tracks like CRZY and Do U Dirty, Kehlani professes to own every aspect of her identity. “Everything I do/ I do with passion,” she sings on CRZY. She recalls her tough upbringing on Not Used To It and warns a would-be lover on Do U Dirty that the “hood in me” beats the “good in me”. SweetSexySavage also contains intriguing relationship songs. The Akon-sampling of Don’t Matter on trap-pop jam Undercover is about keeping a love affair secret, while standout ballad Advice deals with a crushing realisation: “How is the man of my dreams not a man of his word?” With her distinct yet sweet voice, Kehlani’s blending of sounds makes it easy to move from one track to the other. She creates a sense of sonic cohesiveness using electronic undertones and diverse harmonies, proving that she’s a talented vocalist who’s morphed R&B into her own, just as everyone thought there was no place for emerging artists in this genre. No wonder P. Diddy credited her with saving R&B. SweetSexySavage showcases that Kehlani is a strong and independent woman with unique swagger. And it’s that bad-ass attitude and honesty that makes this a compelling debut. She is one of this year’s performers at Coachella Valley Festival.  