With more than a thousand tongues you have shown diversity in the most spectacular way. Your cultures and values have left an indelible mark in the hearts of many near and far. Your bosom birthed the North, South, East and the West. Africa the pride of the world, we write to you words of remembrance; to retell the story long told and to sing the praises that lie buried in the sands of time. Our eyes have grown sore and our hearts are faint for we fear the beads around your waist may break. The recent attacks on some African migrants in Pretoria have been deeply distressing. As young leaders from South Africa and Nigeria, we are concerned at the escalating atmosphere of fear and intolerance that has been brewing in South Africa for years now. It is disturbing to see that instead of resolving whatever issues and differences we have amicably, our people are turning to violence to express themselves. We unequivocally condemn the attacks on any migrants and we equally condemn any violent acts against South Africans by people from outside the country. We both believe that talking is more productive than fighting and this letter serves as our contribution to heal our continent. Consider it our love letter to Africa. The two of us met in the United States last year as participants in the Mandela Washington Fellowship; this is a flagship programme of President Obama’s initiative for Young African Leaders. Danladi is a passionate medical doctor and humanitarian officer who has worked extensively with communities and families with a particular focus on maternal health. He has also been at the forefront of offering psychosocial support to parents of the Chibok girls abducted by Boko Haram militants. Mondli is an emerging young leader who is the director of legislative research for the National Freedom Party in the KwaZulu-Natal provincial legislature. As an orphan, Mondli is passionate about social justice reforms that will provide children from similar backgrounds with opportunities to succeed. He is also a writer and has been published in some of South Africa’s leading publications where he has addressed issues such as drug addiction, education outcomes and human trafficking. The two of us were placed in the public management track and when we first met, it became clear very quickly that we both share a deep-rooted passion for our continent and her people. As we face these attacks, this is a lesson we would like to impart on people from both our countries: there is much more that unites us than divides us. As we attended classes and had discussions along with other fellows, things often became tense and heated. One occasion comes to mind. Our group was handed the task of organising ourselves in preparation for what is known as “Ignite Talks”. This public speaking opportunity would be given to only one member from the group and so we all needed to make sure we chose the best person to speak, and on the right topic. A daunting task. At first none of us had a clue on how to go about this and with that typical South African vigour, Mondli took initiative and acted as chairperson to get the discussions started. As you may imagine, facilitating a conversation with opinionated young leaders from all over the continent was no mean feat. In particular, there was a clash between the two of us. Danladi had strong views on the direction the talks should take and he expressed these with that famous Nigerian assertiveness. Mondli understood this but also had to give everyone else a chance to express their thoughts. We laugh about it in hindsight but try to imagine that war of words between a passionate Nigerian and a bold South African. Hectic. We mention this event because we believe it illustrates the next lesson we would like to share: disagreeing with each other from time to time does not make us un-African and it certainly does not mean we hate each other. On the contrary, if we want Africa to prosper, then we need to be comfortable enough with each other to be honest with one another. Sometimes the truth is unpleasant but it must be spoken. It therefore hurts when we watch people “othering” each other because they believe the other is different. Being different should be seen as an asset and not a tool of division. The two of us were able to move past this minor disagreement because we understood that when all is said and done we both want what is best; we simply had different views on how to get there. We believe there is a common thread that runs throughout our continent. We all want an Africa that is at peace and provides freedom and opportunity for its people. “As a South African, it is my desire for all African nations to enjoy the same economic opportunities and benefits of democracy that I do. I understand that some come to my country because they have none of this in theirs,” says Mondli. In Danladi’s words: “I want the rest of the continent to be industrious and to carry that entrepreneurial spirit which has enabled the Nigerian economy to thrive. Our leaders therefore need to stand up to each other and make sure that each African country achieves these things for their people. I believe this would go some way in mitigating economic migration, which is one of the causes behind these gruesome attacks.” Neither of us wants an Africa that is corrupt and dangerous and our continent cannot be lawless. While people may seek opportunities in other countries it is important that they respect the laws of that country. We need to understand that illegal immigration is unfair to the country people are moving into and its citizens. The calls in South Africa to crack the whip on illegal immigration are therefore not misguided but these should not give people permission to display xenophobic behaviours. It is also important that the South African government addresses the issues raised during these attacks instead of solely focusing on the criminal element of these. It is possible to have both a big-hearted Africa that welcomes people who want help and opportunities while maintaining law and order. Our leaders need to set this example first and instead of the inflammatory and divisive rhetoric we have heard from all sides, we need leaders who will bring people together. The two of us may be on opposite sides of the continent and we face different challenges but what we know for a fact is that we are stronger together. Africa deserves leaders and citizens who will dare to place their differences aside and find solutions together. All of us can do this. We dare you. » Mondli Zondo and Dr Danladi Idrisa are Mandela Washington Fellows from South African and Nigeria. They write in their personal capacity.