70-year-old pensioner Mary Jayne was among hundreds of protesters who gathered in Church Square, Pretoria, against President Jacob Zuma&rsquo;s regime.Jayne told City Press that she had to walk seven blocks to join the crowd of about 400 who were organised under the banner of Save SA.Other civil society groups also took part.&ldquo;I was a member of the ANC but I stopped after Polokwane. I wanted to be here. It is too hot but I think it&rsquo;s something that has to happen. We need gatherings like these countrywide,&rdquo; Jayne said.Jayne, who baked in the hot sun for two hours, said she was also motivated by moves by opposition parties in their attempts for Zuma to be recalled.Axed Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan and his also-axed deputy minister Mcebisi Jonas thanked protesters who gathered in Church Square, next to the National Treasury offices. Former Cosatu general secretary Zwelinzima Vavi, who is part of unionists involved in a new federation expected to compete with Cosatu, rallied the crowd to go to the Union Buildings where the newly appointed ministers and deputy ministers were to be sworn in.Addressing protesters at the Union Buildings, Vavi criticised Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa.He called Ramaphosa a &ldquo;coward&rdquo; for not resigning following his comments that he disagreed with the axing of Gordhan.Ramaphosa said he was very unhappy about the firing of Gordhan and his deputy, Netwerk24 reported today.Ramaphosa was in Bloemfontein on Friday to launch the National Strategic Plan on HIV, TB and STIs.The media bombarded him as he arrived late at Pelonomi Hospital for the launch of the multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis nine-month regimen.&ldquo;I think it is totally unacceptable that he fired someone like Gordhan, who has served the country excellently, for his own gain and survival,&rdquo; he said.&ldquo;I find it very difficult to believe that someone like Gordhan, who has served the country with everything he has and so much pride and total honour, planned to besmirch Zuma and his government overseas. The actions Zuma has against Gordhan is based solely on assumptions.&rdquo;Vavi told protesters in Church Square that it was time to stand up.&ldquo;We are not protecting a &nbsp;Pravin or Jonas faction but this is about defending institutions of democracy including treasury,&rdquo; Vavi said.He narrated Zuma&rsquo;s strategy to capture the state with the Guptas on how the state institutions were destroyed.Vavi said the finance ministry was removed to give way to former Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba, who had replaced Gordhan.He said Gigaba would sign off a bank that would work with the Guptas.Save South Africa&rsquo;s Mark Heywood told protesters that a mass protest must be carried out next week. He said the country needed to be shut down and people not to go to work on Monday.&ldquo;This is a matter of life and death,&rdquo; Heywood said.Earlier while in Church Square, Heywood said it was time for ANC members who were against Zuma to stand up.He said he had messages from ANC members who were against Zuma, and named Gauteng Premier David Makhura, Higher Education Minister Blade Nzimande and Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi.Heywood called last night&rsquo;s events &ldquo;a coup&rdquo;.&ldquo;We call on people who believe in freedom to raise up,&rdquo; Heywood said.Gordhan said protesters should spread the word in communities to let them know what was happening in the country. &ldquo;The majority of ANC members share everything you believe. They will make their voice. We must go back to our roots.&rdquo;Jonas said it was a tough road ahead. &ldquo;There is no difficult struggle like the one against our own comrades. We need to stand up as the nation. You shape history, not leaders,&rdquo; Jonas said.The protests plan to assemble in Church Square again at 9am on Monday as part of mass demonstrations against Zuma&rsquo;s regime.