Former president Kgalema Motlanthe delivered a moving tribute to the late ANC stalwart Ahmed Kathrada, at his funeral at Westpark cemetery in Johannesburg today. His remarks garnered heaps of reaction from the large crowd who had gathered to pay tribute to Kathrada, as Motlanthe focused not just on the life of Uncle Kathy, but his legacy of uniting a divided nation.Here are the top 10 quotes from Motlanthe&rsquo;s speech. 1) After addressing those in attendance, Motlanthe began his speech describing the pain that the nation felt now that Kathrada has passed on. &ldquo;On a day like this we should not mince our words. We should say it like it is. We are pained, saddened and sorrowful. We are a nation in mourning."Isithwalandwe Seaparankwe (struggle icon), Ahmed Kathrada, one of our most revered national leaders, has shuffled off this mortal coil,&rdquo; he began. 2) Motlanthe spoke of the great visionary that Kathrada was. &ldquo;Today is the day on which we close our eyes of comrade Ahmed Kathrada, permanently; because during his lifetime he opened ours for ever and saved us from the blindness of the heart.&rdquo; 3) Kathrada&rsquo;s life was one of an &ldquo;elevated meaning&rdquo; through his forward thinking mindset, as Motlanthe quoted American poet Henry van Dyke to explain this. &ldquo;His frame of vision, which invested his being with elevated meaning, may have been articulated by the poet Henry van Dyke&rsquo;s imperishable words that: &lsquo;There is a loftier ambition than merely to stand high in the world. It is to stoop down and lift mankind &hellip; a little higher&rsquo;.&rdquo; 4) Motlanthe took the opportunity to remind everyone of the open letter that was penned to President Jacob Zuma by Kathrada last year, in which he appealed to the president to step down.&ldquo;In this regard we need not put words into his [Kathrada&rsquo;s] mouth post facto or posthumously; since, true to his consistent principles, he penned a public letter to the president of our country in which he gave vent to his views about the state in which the nation finds itself.&rdquo; 5) While he quoted Kathrada&rsquo;s words by reading out extracts from his letter, Motlanthe was careful to choose certain extracts from the letter. &ldquo;In parts his letter reads: &lsquo;I have always maintained a position of not speaking out publicly about any difference I may harbour against my leaders and my organisation, the ANC. "I would only have done so when I thought that some important organisational matters compel me to raise my concerns,&rsquo;&rdquo; Motlanthe said. 6) Although Motlanthe was merely quoting Uncle Kathy&rsquo;s words, the crowd responded in nods of agreement towards Motlanthe as he reminded everyone how Uncle Kathy called on Zuma to step down from his presidency. Zuma was not present at the funeral. &ldquo;And bluntly, if not arrogantly, in the face of such persistently widespread criticism, condemnation and demand, is it asking too much to express the hope that you will choose the correct way that is gaining momentum, to consider stepping down,&rdquo; Motlanthe read. 7) Motlanthe noted that Kathrada never received a reply to his letter from President Zuma, since sending it almost a year ago. &ldquo;354 days ago today, Comrade Kathrada wrote this letter to which a reply had not been forthcoming. As you are aware, his letter went without any formal reply,&rdquo; he said. 8) Motlanthe explained why he decided to quote Kathrada&rsquo;s letter. &ldquo;I have quoted Comrade Kathy at length in this regard to make the point that for better or for worse what he stood for never changed according to the fluidities of history,&rdquo; he said. 9) Motlanthe went on to reaffirm Kathrada&rsquo;s words by also criticising the current ruling party. &ldquo;Indeed a measure of self-reflection is needed if human civilisation is to endure."The ANC itself may disappear off the face of the earth if it fails to embrace the culture of self-reflection from time to time concerning its character and inner soul as a governing party,&rdquo; he said. 10) Motlanthe attributed Kathrada&rsquo;s unwavering commitment towards his constant political engagement, even into his old age. &ldquo;He was never tired, nor let the fragility of old age stand in his way. He was a redoubtable, diligent and passionate activist for social change and justice, the very metaphor for human agency,&rdquo; he said. Motlanthe received a standing ovation from the crowd.#KathradaFuneral Standing ovation as Kgalema Motlanthe echoes Kathrada's wishes for Zuma to step down pic.twitter.com/gOPfsGb7QwThat was a Key, sober and moving eulogy delivered by Kgalema Motlanthe. Amadla!!Former PP @ThuliMadonsela3 says Kgalema Motlanthe's eulogy was "fantastic" #KathradaFuneral @AfriNewsAgency pic.twitter.com/tqK1pT4D4WWhen Jacob Zuma heard Kgalema Motlanthe reading a letter written by #AhmedKathrada asking him to resign #KathradaFuneral Zuma was like pic.twitter.com/Jpgna7hCcV