Tbo Touch is beaming. It’s been almost seven months since Touch Central was born, but already it is gearing up for major changes. As from next month, the online digital radio station owned by former Metro FM DJ Thabo “Tbo Touch” Molefe will be renamed as Touch HD. The station introduced listeners to a host of undiscovered broadcast talent from across South Africa. The new line-up, which will include some of Mzansi’s big names, will be revealed on Tuesday. The aim of the station was “to disrupt radio as we know it” through innovation and by being “uncensored, uncut and unpredictable”. City Press caught up with Tbo Touch at the Four Seasons Hotel, just after he was revealed as one of the South African faces of French cognac brand Courvoisier along with media personality Bonang Matheba and fashion designer David Tlale. He said that the new Touch HD app would be more interactive than the current one. “Listeners will now be able to actively engage with each other on a range of topics being discussed during live programming, through a new in-app live chat service feature,” he said. Tbo Touch, the host of the afternoon drive time show on TouchCentral from 3pm to 6pm, said it had always been his dream to own Touch HD. “I’m happy that my dream has become reality ... For the first time our app is not just a streaming app, but a visual app which includes shopping experiences and concierge services. You’ll be able to book flights and hotels online at a discount through our app. We are giving people an experience outside radio,” he explained. “I’m excited, I can’t believe it myself. I just want to pinch myself. I’m a firm believer of faith. God took me through adversities that polished me. I value the gift of having an idea and there are resources to make sure that the idea is executed.” He revealed that he was also working on a TV channel and a movie. “I have done enough justice to radio and I stayed the longest time without shifting anywhere,” he said. “I gave everybody an awakening moment to say nothing is permanent in life.”   