The Gauteng department of health was this week ordered to pay R150 000 in damages to a family after a two-year-old boy fell off his bed at Mamelodi Hospital in Pretoria. The order was issued by the North Gauteng High Court. The toddler, who was being treated for pneumonia, sustained a concussion and fractured leg as a result of the fall in 2015. His mother, Daniel Hlako, told City Press that her son is happy and healthy, apart from the fact that he now stutters, which the department has blatantly denied is a result of the fall. “He never used to stutter before, but after he fell, he began stuttering,” Hlako said. It was only five days after his fall that Hlako noticed her son had a bump on his head and his speech was abnormal. “He was taken to Steve Biko hospital where they did a brain scan and discovered that he had a concussion,” Hlako said. Doctors at Steve Biko hospital gave him epileptic medication and he was referred to a speech therapist before he was taken back to Mamelodi hospital. “After he was back at Mamelodi [hospital], the nurses were very short with me. They said I blamed them for what had happened to my son, which is true. I had left him under their care and they couldn’t care for him properly,” Hlako said. Hlako’s son spent another month in hospital and was eventually discharged on April 27 2015. The health authorities denied culpability and claimed that the toddler had jumped out of the bed out of his own will and that they were not responsible for the injuries he had sustained. Sunelle van Heerden, marketing manager for Christopher Consulting who funded the forensic investigation and who appointed the legal team, said it was telling that none of the role players, including the nurses whose job it was to take care of the toddler, accepted responsibility for what had happened. “They continued to claim that they had done nothing wrong and that child had ‘jumped out of bed’.” Van Heerden said not enough people knew that they were liable for compensation when they were injured due to the negligence of others. “I am amazed on a daily basis about how reckless people can be when it comes to the safety and wellbeing of others, whether it be in hospital or in a public place. “We all have a reasonable expectation that we will be safe. When injury or death occurs as a result of negligence the injured parties have the right to be compensated for their loss.” Christopher Consulting funded the risk and all disbursements including the attorney and advocate’s fees on a no-win-no-fee basis. This gave her access to a world-class legal team. Advocate JP Nel, who acted on behalf of the mother, said that the R150 000 settlement was reasonable under the circumstances. Gauteng department of health spokesperson Vuyo Sabani confirmed with City Press that they would settle the matter as per the court order. He said that “the department has a contingency liability of about R16 billion”.    