Trade union Numsa has threatened to plunge the country into darkness should Eskom&rsquo;s planned shutdown of five power stations go ahead. Eskom announced last week that five of its coal-fired power stations located in Mpumalanga &ndash; Hendrina, Kriel, Komati, Grootvlei and Camden &ndash; would be decommissioned, following the need to create space for renewable energy projects. According to Eskom spokesperson Khulu Phasiwe, some of these stations are nearing the end of their lifespan. &ldquo;Working within a context of surplus electricity supply, low economic growth, and the need to add new renewable energy projects, Eskom has had to create space for the renewables by proposing to close some of the coal-fired power stations. This will also help meet South Africa&rsquo;s commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,&rdquo; Phasiwe told City Press. The National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa has hit back at the energy provider, saying that &ldquo;no consultation took place between the board of Eskom and the trade unions&rdquo;. &ldquo;Furthermore as Numsa we are convinced that the lack of consultation demonstrates that there is an attempt to hide the real reasons for this drastic course of action,&rdquo; Numsa general secretary Irvin Jim said yesterday. If the stations do close down, more than 6000 workers are at risk of losing their jobs, including coal miners and truck drivers.Numsa has been engaging with its workers on the ground to establish the next course of action. &ldquo;If necessary we will go on strike and if that means plunging the country into darkness, then that is the strategy we must adopt,&rdquo; Jim said. The future of the power stations, at this stage, is uncertain, with no plans to utilise them any further should they be closed down, according to Phasiwe. &ldquo;Eskom will be meeting with various stakeholders, including the trade unions and government in an effort to address this matter. We are hopeful that the matter will be resolved amicably, and without any job losses,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;All relevant stakeholders, led by government, are trying to come up with a lasting solution to avoid the closures of these power stations,&rdquo; Phawise told City Press.