Shopping centres are increasingly under pressure because sales at retail shops are down. And it’s especially middle-sized shopping centres that are suffering, those that are not small enough to pop into for a quick grocery shop after work, and not big enough for a family outing over the weekend. Evan Robins, a fund manager at Old Mutual Investment Group, said “people go to the mall for the experience or for the convenience. If you don’t offer one of those two things, you are in trouble”. Interim results released this month by various property companies that own shopping malls all show this trend. Ahmed Motara, an analyst of listed property companies at Stanlib, said that although big shopping centres were better off than medium-sized ones, they’re not necessarily doing well. This is apparent when looking at sales per square meter, which is growing quite slowly. Growthpoint, which own, among others, the V&A Waterfront in Cape Town, the Colonnade in Pretoria and Northgate Mall in Johannesburg, said their sales per square meter was only 1.45%. Hyrop, which owns Canal Walk in Cape Town, Clearwater Mall in Roodepoort, Woodlands in Pretoria and Rosebank Mall in Johannesburg, said their sales per square meter had also slowed down, although they did not give a figure. But retailers are making long-term plans and shopping centres are clearly not struggling to close favourable rental agreement as a result. Growthpoint succeeded in negotiating rental agreements in which it successfully obtained on average 4.2% more rental than the contract that had just expired. Hyprop does not say how good its growth was in this category but only that there was growth. Motara said that in the present circumstances any positive growth was a good sign, but it’s only really where growth was around 5% or 6% that it could really be seen as growth. Fairvest’s new contracts are 7.9% more expensive than their previous contracts. It’s a sign that smaller, convenient shopping centres are doing better than big ones. Some of the shopping centres in Fairvest’s portfolio include St George’s Square in George, Clubview Corner in Centurion, the Cosom Centre in Bethal and The Ridge in Roodepoort. Fairview also specifically serves lower income groups. “Retailers do not want sacrifice their market segment so they are still concluding rental agreements,” said Motara. “They are also chasing each other’s tails. If Checkers is in one place, Pick n Pay also wants to be there. And if Pick n Pay is there, Woolworths also wants to be there.” Few shops are empty in big centres. Growthpoint said vacant spaces is the same as last year, at 2.6%. In the V&A Waterfront only 1.1% of shops are vacant. At Hyprop 0.8% of shops are vacant and at Fairvest 4.1%. Growthpoint said in its annual report that new shopping centres did have an effect on existing shopping centres. Examples are the Mall of Africa in Midrand which is less than seven kilometres from Woodmead, as well as the improved Menlyn Mall and Menlyn on Main, which are less than six kilometres from the Brooklyn Mall. Baywest and Greenacres affect Walmer in Port Elizabeth. Growthpoint also says that shops are positioning themselves for the new competitors. In certain cases new shops from within the same group are opened at a new centre close to an existing one and the old one is made smaller or closed down completely. The V&A did a lot better than the rest of Growthpoint’s properties and this success can partly be ascribed to the weak rand in the first part of 2016. Although they are expecting to grow this year, the growth will not be as much as last year. However, the prospects for the rest of their property portfolio are not as rosy, with competition by new shopping buildings being identified as the reason for this. Hyprop plans on expanding this year. At the Rosebank Mall, 4 300 square metres of additional rental space will be completed by April 2018. At the Glen a food court and additional rental space of 1200 square metres will be built and also completed by April 2018.