International Mother Language Day, which took place on February 21, saw a broad array of language-related events taking place across the country, including the Puku Story Festival in isiXhosa, which ran from 21-26 February. Presented by the Puku Children’s Literature Foundation, this year the festival was held at Grahamstown’s National English Literary Museum in the Eastern Cape. A celebration of indigenous music and storytelling took centre stage, with the festival honouring the legendary musician, poet, storyteller and teacher Latozi Mpahleni, better known as Madosini. Madisini has been recognised by the Department of Arts and Culture as a living legend, being able to play the isitolotolo, uhadi and the umrhube mouth bow. Accomplished writers and artists lent their time to this event, showcasing how work could be presented across different platforms to the local school children. For Zanele Ndlovu, the role that traditional music and literature plays in her life is an all-consuming one, with a journey that began at the tender age of nine when she would read stories to her family whilst everyone gathered around a coal stove. The musician is an author of two books, Umakhweyana and Simunye, which were both written in her mother tongue of isiZulu. Ndlovu attended the festival for the second time this year, and was highly impressed at how the festival has grown in just a year. “This year we honoured Mam’Madosini and I was privileged to be on a panel discussion with her. We both play the same instrument and I have always looked up to her,” Ndlovu told City Press. “This year, I ran a workshop for teachers on how to make indigenous instruments and how to read music notes using a curriculum which I have developed for early childhood development,” she said. The festival is geared towards hosting activities for children. Both Ndlovu’s books come with audio CD’s in which she narrates and plays her musical instruments. Eastern Cape based author Unathi Magubeni whose debut novel, Nwelezelanga: The Star Child, which was shortlisted for the prestigious Etisalat Prize, also attended the festival. The book is narrated by the character of Nwelezelanga, a 13-year old albino girl. “Writing is a calling to me, it comes naturally and it’s one of my best forms of expression,” he said. Magubeni hails from a corporate background, and he resigned from his financial job in 2009 in order to pursue a full-time writing career. “My calling now is to write children’s books in my mother tongue; I have to do it for my sanity,” he said. Magubeni is currently traveling around the country with his novel, doing readings, talks and discussions. “My writing envisions a better version of oneself and the target audience are those who are ready to reach beyond their present state and realise more of self-love. Love is the essence,” he said.   