Controversy continues in the Eastern Cape as Andile Lungisa refuses to abide by the marching orders he has been given by the ANC Top 6. Following a meeting that was held to decide on his fate on Monday, the ANC Top 6 decided that Lungisa must step down. ANC national spokesperson Zizi Kodwa confirmed that the Top 6 officials had written to the province. “The instruction is to inform Andile Lungisa to step down as the chairperson of the Nelson Mandela region, as he was elected in contravention of the ANC constitution,” said Kodwa. President Jacob Zuma reportedly endorsed Lungisa, and made a surprise visit to the Nelson Mandela Bay regional conference. Lungisa’s surprise U-turn on standing for election was reportedly because of a call from Number One himself. READ: Zuma endorses Lungisa, makes special visit to PE conference. Provincial secretary of the ANC in the Eastern Cape, Oscar Mabuyane, confirmed conveying the instruction from the top six officials. “I have already communicated the instruction with the regional executive committee in the Bay,” said Mabuyane. “We have requested them [regional executive committee and Lungisa] to act according to the instruction, which clearly states that he shouldn’t be in that collective,” he said. Lungisa would not give in and said his situation was unique. “The issue of the Nelson Mandela Region is different from others because here, we are on a revolutionary cause to reclaim the metro,” said Lungisa. “Even if there existed a clause that prohibits a member from doing what I did, we are a liberation movement and in this case, there would have been an exception to the rule. There are exceptions to every rule,” he said. Following several exchanges of letters, including that of an apology penned to ANC secretary-general, Gwede Mantashe, Lungisa also corrected what he calls the “misinterpretation” of his apology. “I apologised for my utterances and not the stand I took to continue with the race or my interpretation of the ANC constitution. Any interpretation of the ANC constitution which causes a disagreement must never be insulted, but engaged politically in the structures of the ANC,” said Lungisa. “We are not going to allow being insulted on the issue of interpretation, if we have a different interpretation, we must go and seek a legal opinion,” he said. Lungisa said would be standing his ground, because he was a product of families of gallant and fearless freedom fighters, who stood up against the oppressive systems from long ago. “I don’t run away from any political debates because I come from a family where it becomes natural to grow up in politics fearlessly,” he said. “A political engagement discourse should take place, instead of hurling insults. We are not going to allow being insulted on an issue of interpretation, if we have a different interpretation a legal process must follow,” he said. City Press has reliably learnt that Lungisa has a trump card – the likes of Advocate Tembeka Ngcukaitobi, who is the gutsy legal mind who took on Zuma to implement the former Public Protector’s recommendations on Nkandla. “The issue at hand is double parking on positions, where comrades who serve in the region would also be in the province and be national executive committee members at the same time,” he said. “Even the guidelines that must be developed must be consistent and in line with the constitution. Even myself as Andile, I cannot use general knowledge on political matters because politics are very complex,” he said. He said when amendments were added to the constitution, it was to discourage this double parking syndrome. “I sit in the constitutional amendments in all conferences of the ANC, so it is unlikely that I can misinterpret the constitution,” explained Lungisa. “Rule 17.4 of the constitution must be read together with other related clauses on membership, for proper context,” he said. “That will enable one to read the clauses with understanding and have a proper interpretation of the constitution. We must not be undermined on interpretation of ANC documents,” said Lungisa. “That is when you deliberate with comrades and encourage them not to stand for positions in lower structures, because they serve on higher structures; we call that encouragement. You cannot force the encouragement on the basis that you have encouraged others, even Lungisa must be encouraged,” he said. He believed that the ANC needed to assess what kind of leaders are needed in each space, and not limit the local needs only to issues of rules. “In political terms, what do you say in a case where the membership say this is the kind of leadership to take this region forward? Surely you cannot open a book of rules in that case, you must analyse the situation in political terms,” he stated. “I was happy when the president of the ANC arrived at the conference. He discussed the matter with delegates. President Zuma never opened a book of rules.”  