There is a worrying decline in productivity on redistributed farms.This hampers the provinces&rsquo; efforts to grow the agricultural sector to ensure food security and of creating much needed jobs for the unemployed, said Mpumalanga Premier David Mabuza in his state of the province address. The land reform programme supports the provincial agenda of growing the agricultural sector for both domestic consumption and exports to international markets, said Mabuza.The sector contributes 3.4% of the gross domestic product, accounting for 630 000 formal jobs. The government has to date, through the land reform programme, acquired and allocated 461 946 hectares for land redistribution and another 503 769 hectares for the settlement of land claims. In the process, a total of almost R7.5 billion has been spent by government on these acquisitions. &ldquo;However, it is of great concern that despite such investment, most of these farms are lying fallow without any agricultural activity. This is not right and cannot be accepted. It undermines our efforts of addressing the land question. It affects the agenda of growing the agricultural sector to address food security, and of creating much needed jobs for the unemployed,&rdquo; said Mabuza.The decline in productivity was addressed by engaging stakeholders through fora such as the national land summit held in 2015 and the vulnerable workers forum held in 2016. &ldquo;The state of dysfunctionality and non-compliance of these Trusts and CPAs is of major concern. They inadvertently threaten peace and stability in some communities, as is the case in Mpakeni-Mlegeni.&rdquo;A provincial land summit will be held soon to discuss pertinent policies and issues affecting the land reform programme and to comprehensively respond to these issues. The socioeconomic conditions of farm dwellers have also received an urgent intervention. The Mpumalanga provincial government is working with the department of rural development and land reform, the land owners and the farm dwellers and workers to find negotiated solutions to prevailing problems.&ldquo;I am pleased to report that the commission on the socioeconomic conditions of farm dwellers completed and presented its report in September last year,&rdquo; said Mabuza. The report raised critical issues around security of tenure, the violation of rights, and matters related to poor access to key infrastructure and social services such as education, health, housing and basic services.The premier indicated that an integrated programme of action will be implemented in the coming financial year, to address the recommendations contained in the commission&rsquo;s report. In this regard a coordinating structure located in the office of the premier will mobilise all key stakeholders to work together to deliver programmes that will change the lives of farm dwellers for the better.