The closure of &ldquo;non-viable&rdquo; schools has stirred up controversy again, this time a plan to close more than 3 200 in seven provinces over the next three years.The Democratic Alliance has accused the ANC of being hypocritical for supporting the closure of the schools following the ruling party&rsquo;s resistance to the closure of 20 schools by the DA-led government in the Western Cape in 2012.Rationalisation is a process where schools &ndash; many of them on farms and in rural areas &ndash; are closed down or merged due to a decline in enrolment. However, ANC MPs have hit back, saying that their dispute with the DA in 2012 was over the lack of consultation before deciding to close down the schools, not rationalisation per se.The basic education department told MPs at a basic education parliamentary portfolio committee meeting earlier this month that 1902 schools were closing in the Eastern Cape, 865 in KwaZulu-Natal, 233 in North West, 93 in the Free State; 73 in Limpopo; 50 in the Northern Cape and 41 in Mpumalanga. The department did not disclose the number of schools closing in Western Cape and Gauteng, a point of concern that was raised by chairperson Nomalungelo Gina. During the meeting, the DA questioned whether the process had been held up to scrutiny by the ANC and this week submitted parliamentary questions to find out whether the closures would follow due and proper processes.In a statement, DA member of Parliament Nomsa Marchesi said: &ldquo;Should the replies to our questions confirm that proper processes were not followed, the DA will investigate all avenues to ensure the provincial departments are held accountable.&rdquo;She accused the ANC of being hypocritical for &ldquo;continuously criticising&rdquo; the Western Cape education department for following due process at the time. &ldquo;The blatant double standards of the ANC government is unacceptable. The same fervour which the ANC used to condemn the Western Cape&rsquo;s school rationalisation should be applied to the actions of its very own government,&rdquo; she said.However, both Gina and ANC MP Nthibane Mokoto said that the DA was missing the point. It was up to Parliament&rsquo;s oversight role to ensure that the process was fair and procedural. &ldquo;The ANC was never against rationalisation, but about the regulations and process and consultations that need to be followed. It cannot be done haphazardly,&rdquo; said Gina.She said that if a school had 150 pupils or less, it often made sense to rationalise in the interests of improving the quality of education.&ldquo;But due process needs to be followed. If it is done well, it is for the benefit of the community.&rdquo;She said what was vital was that rationalisation was not done in isolation, but in partnership with issues such as scholar transport to ensure that pupils had access to the new school that they would attend.Mokoto agreed, saying that ANC MPs were &ldquo;fully behind the department and very much aware of the processes&rdquo;.She said this was not the time for politicking. &ldquo;The DA is trying to play a political game. Our concern with rationalisation has been lack of consultation. We see during our oversight visits when there has been no dialogue. Failure to consult can be detrimental. "When there are complaints from the communities, it is our duty and responsibility to assist. No one must be left out and unsatisfied,&rdquo; she said.