If you are being retrenched, you need to take the following steps to protect your finances: It is important to note that in order to qualify for any of these benefits you need to have formal notification of retrenchment from your employer. You cannot claim retrenchment cover if you have been dismissed from your employer or taken voluntary retrenchment. In addition, there are usually time limits before you can claim. For example, in some cases you will not have cover if you are retrenched within 90 days of taking the cover or if you received a retirement notice up to three months before taking out the cover. How to apply for UIF If you’re going on maternity leave or have been retrenched you can claim from the government’s Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF), which should help replace a portion of your income and tide you over until you can find another job or return to work after having a baby. If you haven’t claimed from the UIF before or are unsure of the process, it would help to become informed about recent changes around how claims can be made and how much you qualify for.    The good news is that the
changes mostly favour the recipient. Here are some of the main benefits and
improvements in the amendment act: 1. Payment of the unemployment benefit will be for 12 months instead of the current eight months. 2. Maternity benefit will be paid at a flat rate of 66% instead of the current sliding scale of between 38%-60%. 3. The period within which to submit claims is increased from six months to 12 months for unemployment, maternity, illness, and adoption benefits. For the death benefit you can submit a claim within 18 months. 4. Public servants and people in learnerships are going to be able to contribute and claim from UIF. 5. Workers who work for reduced hours or a short time will be able to claim for the lost hours. SERVICE-DELIVERY IMPROVEMENTS Claiming from the UIF has not been smooth sailing for all concerned. However the department of labour has engaged in several initiatives to improve its services. For instance – you can make a UIF claim online, in much the same way you can file your taxes online. Internal changes have also been made. “We have started to increase bandwidth in some of the labour centres to enable faster processing of documents and this is going to be rolled out in other labour centres throughout the country,” says Buthelezi. It’s not unheard of to receive your benefits weeks after filing. “At the moment claims submitted in Cape Town are approved in record times of two to three weeks if all documents are complete and correct. The DoL (department of labour) always quotes 35 working days. Some claims can take much longer if something goes wrong. Six-month delays are rare but do occur occasionally,” says Klaus Arnhard, founder of agency UIF-Hero. However the department says it is looking into this following a number of workshops which resulted in a service delivery improvement plan. “The DoL has also reviewed claim turnaround times to make them shorter so clients can enjoy their benefits at the time they need them,” says Buthelezi. WHY AGENCY INVOLVEMENT WILL BE REDUCED One of the more contentious changes, however, has been the prohibition of the use of agencies to process claims on behalf of applicants. The department of labour’s past inefficiencies have resulted in an entire industry springing up to help applicants process claims, particularly maternity benefits. Agencies providing such services include UIF-Hero, Bunny Hop, UIF Services, and Little Monkey UIF Claims to mention a few. They typically charge a once-off fee ranging from R400 to R850. The new act says: “When processing application for benefits neither the fund nor any agency or person purporting to act on behalf of the applicant may charge a fee against the applicant.’’ But industry commentators argue that agencies were created to fulfil a need and to help with the complexities of making a claim. They add that using agencies creates jobs and results in successful claims that are usually processed in shorter periods of time.          