The forensic investigator that Kenny Kunene hired to investigate the alleged attempt on his life has compared the incident to the &ldquo;assassination&rdquo; of Brett Kebble.Dr David Klatzow, a private investigator from Cape Town, was appointed by Kunene to investigate because the police were supposedly not taking the case seriously enough. &ldquo;The case reminds me more and more of the assassination of Brett Kebble, when former police commissioner Jackie Selebi instructed the police not to investigate the case too thoroughly&rdquo; Klatzow told City Press&rsquo; sister paper Rapport. &ldquo;I want to know if the police in Kenny&rsquo;s case received a similar instruction and why a junior constable was appointed to do an investigation of this magnitude.&rdquo;Kebble, the controversial mining magnate, was shot dead while driving in 2005 in what was supposedly a bizarre &ldquo;assisted suicide&rdquo; plot which Kebble had orchestrated. According to Klatzow, he removed five bullets from the bodywork and tyres of the car Kunene was driving in after the police released the vehicle. Seven shots had hit the vehicle. &ldquo;There was a .45mm round in the tyre and the others were from a 9mm pistol. How did the police miss that? All they did was to pick up the bullet casings at the scene and even that was done carelessly because a television news crew picked up another casing there hours after the incident.&rdquo;Kunene was with Sunday Independent editor Steve Motale and a female companion at the time of the incident on Tuesday night. Kunene and his friend were on the their way back to Sandton in her BMW and Kunene was driving. A white Lexus stopped in front of them and three men jumped out and started firing at them. Kunene alleges that 21 shots were fired. Not a single shot hit the windscreen of the vehicle and all of the shots were aimed in the direction of the passenger door. &ldquo;The suspicion is that the attackers thought that the friend was driving and that Kenny was in the passenger seat,&rdquo; said Klatzow. Brigadier Mothapelo Peters, provincial police spokesperson in Gauteng, confirmed that the police had conducted a full forensic investigation of the car. She did not respond to any other questions because they formed part of an ongoing investigation.