 Locally, 2017 has been a bumper year for the French manufacturer with an unprecedented rise in sales. Recently Melinda Ferguson got to test two of Renault’s just launched products – the Duster EDC and the all-new Captur. Renault in South Africa has got to be doing something very right. In a tough and downward spiraling car market, the French manufacturer has grown a whopping 22% in local sales in 2017. Once dismissed for shoddy service, expensive and hard-to-source parts, Renault has literally experienced a rebirth locally. I have keenly watched how, over the last couple of years, the manufacturer has rebranded creating customer confidence and very competitive pricing. Since January 2017, no less than 10 new or refreshed products have been launched – in fact, wherever I look I seem to see a Renault parked or driving alongside me. Recently I attended the launch of a new derivative of the tough and popular Renault Duster – the much-anticipated 4x2 dCi Automatic EDC – the first automatic gearbox in the line-up. It was only a matter of time before Renault saw the gap in adding an automatic diesel to its manual petrol/diesel line-up – diesel variants account for 63% of local Duster sales. The Duster’s been a popular choice since 2013 with South Africans who’ve purchased more than 12 000 units of this authentic don’t-mess-with-me SUV with rough and tough off-road capabilities. Globally a whopping two million Dusters have left the showroom.  Besides looking decidedly sleeker and sharper, the new EDC, available in the 4x2 Dynamic trim, has an all new 1.5dCi turbo diesel engine, which delivers very impressive fuel frugality at just 4.8 litres/100kms. There’s lots of kit that comes standard, like the user-friendly 7” MediaNav® touch screen, cruise control, leather steering wheel and gearshift, plus a nifty rear parking camera – a must for the reverse parking-challenged, aka moi. Torque has increased to 250 Nm, while power remains unchanged at 80kw. Because of fuel frugality, it’s entirely possible to do a 1200km journey on a single tank. There’s also ample storage room with 475 litres of boot space. But possibly the best part of the new Duster is its highly competitive pricing – the new EDC comes in at under R300k. Quel bonne affaire!  New Renault Captur If you’re not looking for a huge SUV, but still want good ground clearance of 170mm, raised seating and impressive gravel road capability, the new Renault Captur could be just the Compact Crossover made for you. It’s stylishly French and highly intuitive with some impressive drive tech. The one thing that Renault always gets right is in its design department – the Captur epitomises the French manufacturer’s penchant for aesthetic. The new Captur bursts onto the local market with a redesigned upper grille with classy chromed edging while the full LED Pure Vision and daytime running lights add to the stylish look. The 17” Black and Chrome alloys make a real statement. Plus, if funky is what you’re drawn to you’ll love the range of colours, especially the variants which come in two-tone bodywork (standard on the top of the range Dynamique models). I was particularly drawn to the cream body and black roof option. Just as impressive is what’s available inside. There’s a new leather steering, rear park sensors, front and rear electric windows, auto headlamps with auto windscreen wipers, bluetooth connectivity, cruise control and speed limiter, plus cornering headlamps that come standard across the range.  For extra real quality and comfort, heated leather seats and the impressive MediaNav touchscreen integrated tablet are available on Dynamique models. The Captur comprises of three engine line-ups – the entry level 66kW petrol Turbo, the 1.2 litre 88kW Manual and EDC Turbo power plants, and the highly fuel efficient 1.5 dCi Diesel engine with 66kW and 220Nm and incredible fuel returns of just 3.6 litres/100km. I was worried about lack of power in the 66kW Diesel – but on both gravel and tar the drive was surprisingly strong thanks to strong torque and its F1-inspired turbo engine. One of my favourite features in the new Captur is the option of removable seat covers, which can be unzipped, machine-washed and refitted. No more grubby seats! Viva la Clean Captur! Pricing: 1.5 dCi Dynamique EDC diesel R299 900 Renault Captur Blaze R229 900 Rating: 4 stars    