Karabo Mogane, the winner of the 11th season of Idols, which aired in 2015, is gearing up to take home the prize for another reality show – Tropika Island of Treasure season eight. TV presenter and actress Khanya Mkangisa, singer Brendan Peyper and fitness coach Sbahle Mpisane have been announced as three of the other celebrities who will compete. This week, Tropika dropped hints on Twitter, and some fans even correctly predicted that Mogane would indeed be a contestant.     Expresso presenter Katlego Maboe will take over the reigns from Minnie Dlamini and host the show this year. Maboe said: “One really exciting part of Tropika Island of Treasure season eight is finding talent across South Africa. Often, the contestants go on to become stars. I’m really looking forward to the auditions! I’m also excited to spend time in the Maldives – it is the ultimate paradise destination – and to see what challenges the contestants will [face] on the island.” Maboe will also perform the theme tune for Tropika Island of Treasure, which will be launched soon. Mogane, who wants to break away from the Idols label, said that, when he got the call from Tropika to be on the show, he immediately said yes. “It’s such an honour to be associated with the brand…a huge brand at that,” he said when he spoke to City Press over the phone. “I am really excited.” After the success of the last Tropika Island of Treasure, hopefuls will once again join seven celebrities in paradise and will compete for a share of R1 million. Previous seasons of Tropika Island of Treasure have seen contestants and celebs visit some of the most incredible destinations, including Mexico, Jamaica, the Seychelles, Mauritius and more. Auditions for fans to partner with their favourite celebrity will take place in three of the major cities start on September 30 and end on October 14. “I think it’s important to find a partner who complements my weakness – the perfect balance makes for the best team,” said Mogane. When asked what would impress him at the auditions, Mogane responded confidently that authenticity would grab his attention. “Be you. Communicate your strengths during the audition so that I can see whether we’d make a formidable team. Also, be honest, because it’s all about what you can and can’t do, and what I can and can’t do.” Mogane, who is a business management student at Unisa, said he had not been to the Maldives before, but looked forward to some time to reflect and win, while enjoying the crystal-clear turquoise sea. Miantha Padayachee, the brand group manager for Tropika, is looking forward to seeing how the show plays out in the Maldives with a new group of contestants. “The past seven seasons of Tropika Island of Treasure have been incredibly successful. For season eight, we needed to up the ante and really take it to the next level. The Maldives is the epitome of smooth island living and will add a new dimension to the show. Fans can expect the same exciting and fun Tropika Island of Treasure that they have come to know and love – with a few surprise twists this season.” Here’s how you can get to the Maldives South Africans dreaming of amazing prizes, fame, fortune and joining their favourite celebs in paradise have a few ways to enter. Join the auditions: Buy any Tropika product and join the Tropika team at the #TIOT8 auditions: - September 30 at Cavendish Square, Cape Town - October 7 at Gateway, Durban - October 14 at The Zone, Johannesburg If you join the auditions, keep an eye out for your favourite celebs, who’ll be making appearances when you least expect it. Competition for one of the seven coveted spots and a chance to win R1 million will be fierce. Solve riddles and get a golden ticket to the auditions Tropika has this week been sharing a riddle a day on its social-media platforms with clues about which celebs will feature in #TIOT8. Each day, a new clue is revealed, and one lucky person who correctly guesses the celeb each day will win a golden ticket that’ll allow them access to the audition phase and an opportunity to jump the queue. Seven celebs; seven clues over seven days; and seven golden tickets. Visit tropika.co.za for more information    