Imagine commuting in a taxi that offers free online radio station and free internet browsing on your own mobile device while in transit. This is what Massiv Metro, through its latest innovation, has in mind. Started by serial entrepreneur and popular disc jockey Sbusiso Leope, radio guru Tony Mallam and Nicolas Regisford, the business model involves providing good radio content to the taxi commuter market at no cost. The radio station, based in Rosebank, has already signed up popular names for its live streaming programme line-up including Zola, Leope, comedian Celeste Nthuli, singer and actress Thembi Seete and popular DJ Mgedeza, and a number of guest DJs have also been lined up too. Backed by decade old Massiv Media, which has already made a name for itself through its rights to more than 40 taxi ranks nationwide, Massiv Metro will be also be broadcasting live from its studio to the Massiv Media screen in taxi ranks. “The difference between us and other digital radio stations is that we are taking it to a particular market. We are taking it to the taxi market and the problem in the past has always been the cost of data. And that’s put people off so far because streaming costs data. How we make it is by making the cost of listening zero,” Mallam said, speaking to City Press on Thursday about the new venture. “By working with Massiv Media, who have a lot of experience in that market, we know that market well. Our survey shows the market is in the LSM (Living Standards Measure) seven, eight and nine categories while the four, five and six LSMs are in the buses and trains.” According to Mallam, the company will be installing streaming devices in 1000 taxis across Gauteng. The devices will stream the Massiv Metro radio station while also creating a wi-fi hotspot for passengers. It would reach an audience of 700 000 people in a five-day week. “Commuters will be able to listen to the station in three ways, in the taxis equipped with Massiv Metro devices, in the taxi ranks where Massiv Metro has a presence, and online via the website or app on a mobile device,” Mallam said. “The incentive for the taxi driver will be that he gets a free digital radio sound system and all kinds of discounts through our reward programme. For commuters to access the free wi-fi they will have to register on the Massiv Metro network then the network will recognise that device in the ranks, in the taxis and online,” he said Mallam said the first 1000 taxis earmarked for installation will be from the six taxi hubs in the province – Bella Ombre, Katlehong, Daveyton, Diepsloot, Tembisa and Faraday taxi ranks. Then they will all be equipped with fibre-backed high quality wi-fi. There are also plans to roll out the model across the country with the next destinations being KwaZulu-Natal and Western Cape provinces. Though the language medium will be mostly English, there will be a lot of township slang and isiZulu. “It will probably be 75-25 English vernac. You know why we focus on isiZulu side as well. Because 99% of the drivers are Zulu, so we’ve got to keep the driver happy, and then we keep the passenger happy,” Mallam said. Massiv Metro will combine popular urban sounds of hip-hop, house, kwaito and reggae with soul, uplifting, feel-good music in the Afro-soul and R&B/gospel genre, with traditional African music from the continent, including maskandi and mbaqanga. 