More than 50 protesters gathered in Pretoria&rsquo;s Church Square on Monday to protest against President Jacob Zuma&rsquo;s Cabinet reshuffle and to &ldquo;defend our democracy&rdquo;. The protest was organised by Save South Africa.The protesters moved from Church Square to the national treasury, with one speaker calling for an occupation of the space until Zuma resigns. &ldquo;We are defending our democracy.&rdquo;The campaign is calling on all South Africans to peacefully protest and to work together to reject Zuma&rsquo;s new Cabinet and to stop state capture.Sipho Pityana, a Save SA convener and an international mobiliser during the anti-apartheid movement, also attended the protest. Pityana called for the resignation of Zuma.&ldquo;Our freedom is not for sale,&rdquo; Pityana said.&ldquo;We must say no to a corrupt country. This protest here must be like the protests in other parts of the world. It starts with two people. It grew to hundreds of people. It must grow to thousands of people. Don&rsquo;t worry how many you are. Your voice is very powerful.&rdquo; Many of the attendees were wearing green shirts with &ldquo;Save SA&rdquo; written on the front. The speakers led the group in chants, songs and dancing. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re putting more pressure on Zuma, and stepping up our programme of rolling mass action. We reject his new Cabinet. We reject what he&rsquo;s doing to sell South Africa to the Guptas. And we&rsquo;re not going to stop until he stops,&rdquo; Save SA said.Treasury spokesperson Yolisa Tyantsi said new Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba was not at the National Treasury on Monday to respond to the protest. According to Tyantsi, Save SA did not make pre-arrangements to meet with Gigaba. Tyantsi said the protesters were informed that the minister was not on the premises.But according to Save SA, the campaign had not intended to speak with Gigaba directly. Instead, Monday&rsquo;s protest was part of setting up a permanent camp for protesters in Church Square, which would act as the centre of operations and mobilisation for the week&rsquo;s protests across the country.According to a Save SA press release, a People&rsquo;s Rally is scheduled for Tuesday in Port Elizabeth&rsquo;s City Hall Square at 1pm. The rally is to be addressed by former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas.A people&rsquo;s march on the Union Buildings is also scheduled for Friday beginning at 10am.