TV presenter Dineo Ranaka will be replacing Bonang Matheba on Metro FM. City Press has been reliably informed that Ranaka – a former YFM and 5FM DJ, will join Lerato Kganyago and Quinton Masina, the “Naked DJ”, as from today on The Front Row, from 10am to 12pm. Ranaka is currently in the Metro FM studios to report for duty on her first day. She reportedly handed in her resignation yesterday just after her show. Kganyago who used to host a drive-time show called The Drive with Moeti “Mo Flava” Tsiki, joined Matheba yesterday on the show. However, after the show Matheba shocked the nation when she announced her resignation. In a series of tweets she explained the reason she parted ways with the station after three years. She tweeted: “My heart is broken. I was told about the changes to my show an hour before going on air today.” She confirmed that after three years of making magic on the Front Row, she had officially stepped down as the host of the show. “I will miss my Metro FM family dearly, as they say good things do come to an end ... Looking forward to the time the next chapter of my radio life.” On Sunday City Press reported that former Metro FM DJ Tbo Touch was not only competing with one of Mzansi’s favourite radio stations, he was also going after every senior DJ at Metro FM – including Robert Marawa and Unathi Msengana. At the launch of the Touch HD digital radio station last week, Molefe hinted that Marawa’s new contract was in his car. However, Marawa’s name was not included in the new Touch HD line-up, and neither was Msengana’s. But Glen Lewis, who parted ways with Metro FM a week ago after two decades at the station, will be hosting Touch HD’s breakfast show. Tbo Touch, whose real name is Thabo Molefe, made it clear that it was now personal. “I’m going to poach all their best DJs until they give me my last show. “I’ve had 12 years of the best radio experience. I submitted my resignation at 9am and I said: ‘Today I’m going to say goodbye to my listeners, I want to say goodbye to everybody.’ “You know what they said? They told me to just go.”   