Former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas has resigned from Parliament. His resignation is effective from the end of March. The office of the ANC chief whip&rsquo;s liaison officer, Nonceba Mhlauli, said they were not told the reasons for Jonas&rsquo;s resignations and said she was not in a position to speculate.Mhlauli said the ANC would begin a formal process to replace Jonas as a member of Parliament. &ldquo;Comrade Jonas has served both as deputy minister and MP with absolute distinction and dedication. He has also served the movement and the South African people in various capacities over the years. On behalf of the ANC in Parliament we thank comrade Jonas for his selfless service to the movement as its public representative,&rdquo; Mhlauli said. Calls to Jonas went unanswered, and his former spokesperson couldn&rsquo;t comment because he no longer worked for the treasury.&ldquo;We are confident that he will continue serving the country and our movement in other capacities in future. We wish him well,&rdquo; Mhlauli said. Jonas&rsquo;s move follows on the heels of former transport minister Dipuo Peters. Parliament confirmed her resignation as an ANC MP on Wednesday. President Jacob Zuma sacked Peters, Jonas and finance minister Pravin Gordhan during his Cabinet reshuffle on Thursday night last week. Zuma appointed 10 new ministers and 10 new deputy ministers. ANC Chief Whip Jackson Mthembu said the only crime Gordhan and Jonas had committed was being incorruptible. They were set to return to Parliament as ordinary MPs. Mhlauli told News24 on Wednesday that the resignation of Peters was also effective as of March 31. Mthembu wished Peters well in her future endeavours. &ldquo;Comrade Peters has served the movement and the people of South Africa in various capacities over the years with absolute distinction. On behalf of the ANC in Parliament we thank comrade Peters for her selfless service and dedication to the movement as its public representative,&rdquo; he said. &ndash; News24