Two of Nasty C’s music videos that were nominated for a South African Music Awards (Samas) for best music video of the year have been disqualified on grounds that the submissions were late. As a result of these changes, Nasty C no longer leads the list of nominees for the awards. He has been downgraded from seven to five nominations, making fellow rapper Kwesta the most nominated artist of the 23rd instalment of the awards with his six nods. Advocate Nhlanhla Sibisi, chief executive of the Recording Industry of South Africa (RiSA), announced on Tuesday night that Nasty C’s music videos had been removed from the running after an investigation was conducted following a number of enquiries. He said their RiSA/Sama office discovered that Nasty C’s music videos for the songs Good Girls, and Don’t Do It entered in the category best music video were late. Their investigations team revealed that the videos were submitted for entry on January 24. They also realised that the videos had not been flighted on a TV programme before the closing date of the entries of January 31, as required by the rules. Sibisi said they always trusted that all music videos submitted for this category should have already been broadcast somewhere before the specified period. “This case has proven us wrong and we accept full responsibility for [failing to do due diligence and to] verify whether the submitted music videos were in fact flighted during the relevant entry period,” Sibisi admitted. “In light of this, the two music videos are automatically disqualified because they do not meet the criteria for best music video category,” he said, adding that replacement nominees will be announced shortly. “The South African Music Awards pride themselves with a rich history of accountability and credibility. Our legitimacy is in our checks and balances, including public involvement and how swiftly we act,” Sibisi said in a desperate bid to assure the public that there was no deliberate intention to favour Nasty C above other contenders.