Igazi, the popular isiXhosa melodrama, is back on our TV screens tonight for the start of season two. Last year, the finale of the drama that tells the story of a Xhosa royal family in conflict over the nation’s throne, left many disappointed when Nomarussia (Vatiswa Ndara) was charged for the murder of Jonga (Thami Mngqolo). This season, the truth unfolds about the reasons behind Nomarussia’s incarceration as she comes to terms with Jonga’s murder. “In this new season, expect more drama and chaos from Nomarussia,” Ndara warns. The new season’s stellar cast includes former Generations actors Zikhona Sodlaka, Zenande Mfenyana, Anga Makubalo and Zolisa Xaluva. Ndara (46) says that when producers at Ferguson Films briefed her about her character, she had a completely different picture in mind. She thought Nomarussia was a simple Eastern Cape woman. But when she went for her wardrobe fittings and read the script, “I then realised that she is an evil and mad woman”. So, what do Ndara and Nomarussia have in common? “Have you noticed how Nomarussia’s lines are so stupid at times? Nomarussia and I have a sense of humour; I like laughing and talking nonsense at times, and I think Nomarussia is exactly like me.” Asked if she has ever received a smack from an angry fan, Ndara says, “You’d be surprised. They always comment on social media, but when I meet them in person, they are always surprised, and say to me: ‘This can’t be you! You’re so sweet! You look young and different’.” Her favourite tweet from a fan so far is: “You can give Vatiswa any role, she can even play a goat.” Although Nomarussia does not give up on anything, Ndara cautions viewers to let go when something does not go their way. “If it’s not meant for you, don’t force it. Don’t use witchcraft!” While Ndara appreciates being able to work as an actress, she has issues with the industry, which she says doesn’t pay its big, talented stars what they’re worth. Asked whether she’s earned what she deserves, Ndara pauses: “Oh my goodness, the day that happens, I’ll walk around naked in Joburg! Then you’ll know I have reached my mark.” Ndara is currently shooting a new drama series which starts on e.tv next month, but wouldn’t divulge details. .
 Catch Igazi tonight at 8pm on Mzansi Magic (DStv channel 161)