South African Masters winner Charl Schwartzel said ahead of today’s start of the 2017 tournament that it was about time that one of the country’s golfers brought a major trophy home. The last South African to win a major was Ernie Els, who won the Open in 2012. Since then, there have been a few second-placed finishes, but the big prize has eluded them. Schwartzel, who is one of three South Africans (the others are Gary Player and Trevor Immelman) to have won the coveted Green Jacket, which the winner of the Masters gets, spoke to City Press late on Wednesday after the traditional par-three contest had to be called off due to tornado warnings. “Augusta National is very difficult to play at any time, but if the weather is poor, it becomes even more difficult. There is a lot of wind forecast for the next few days, which will have an impact. “If the conditions are windy, it will benefit the experienced players, as they know what to expect. Luckily I am one of them.” Since winning the Masters in 2011, the Johannesburg-born golfer has failed to impress in Augusta, with his best finish being 25th in 2013. He missed the cut last year, but is optimistic that he will be strong this time around. “I have been hitting well in the practice rounds and if it is windy, then you are never really out of the competition until it is finished.” The five-year barren spell since Els’ victory in the Open at Royal Lytham and St Annes Golf Club, is the longest South Africa has been waiting for a victory in a major since Els first won the US Open in 1994. “It has been disappointing that South Africans have not won a major since 2012, but all that means is that we are even more determined to win. This run will come to an end at some stage. Hopefully on Sunday.” Schwartzel was disappointed that the par-three contest had to be called off. “It is something that I always enjoy very much. My family caddies for me and my kids love the outing. “We also always play as a South African group, this time around with Trevor and Louis [Oosthuizen], so it is always a terrific day. But I suppose we then have a little bit more time to prepare for the first round, so that is a positive.”