Thousands of colourful supporters of the #ZumaMustFall campaign led by Save SA gathered in front of the Port Elizabeth City Hall on Friday.As many as 7 000 people of different shapes and sizes came to make their voices heard loud and clear on their common goal: to get President Jacob Zuma to vacate his office.Wearing green-and-black Save SA T-shirts to symbolise a country in mourning, protestors sang struggle songs and chanted Zuma must go now .Speakers were a combination of men and women from all walks of life.At the gathering, Malibongwe Yokwe, one of the coordinating members of Save SA in Port Elizabeth, announced: We have once more been downgraded today, this time by Fitch Ratings. The news was followed by gasps from the crowd, followed by a struggle song and more chants for Zuma to step down.Speaking to City Press after the two-hour gathering, Eastern Cape convener Mkhuseli Jack said the support was amazing. People from all sectors, black and white, poor and rich, literate and illiterate came together to support this initiative, he said. I am convinced we have done our job, even if we were to lose this battle. At least the children of the future will never say we did nothing about the current situation, said Jack.He said Save SA owed its success it to everyone who supported the call for action. Everybody who is here will legitimately claim that they were part of [taking] action, he said.He said in the struggle for liberation, many claimed they had fought for the freedom of the country; yet, a lot of people came out only when the coast was clear. To come out at this point when it is equally dangerous for everyone is most encouraging, said Jack. I believe we are on track. Another gathering will be held at Dan Qeqe Stadium, in the form of a rally. On that day, great giants of the struggle coupled with knowledgeable people will address Save SA supporters, to give them insight in the situation we find ourselves in and its impact on us as a country. The journey now will be on preparing for April 27, when more people will gather to enhance the # ZumaMustGo campaign, said Jack.