The ANC Youth League (ANCYL) in Limpopo has lambasted Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa for donating buffalos to a game farm in Makhado, near troubled Vuwani. Spokesperson for the Limpopo ANCYL, Matome Moremi, said &ldquo;buffalos will not vote for the ANC in the next coming national elections&rdquo;.He said this was the reason they would not attend the event at Matsila village where Ramaphosa donated three buffalos. He argued that Ramaphosa should have donated schools in the area instead, because more than 30 schools were torched and damaged by angry residents in Vuwani who demanded that the area be disassociated from the new Malamulele municipality known as LIM345 in the Vhembe district. Local chief Kgoshi Livhuwani Matsila of Matsila Village confirmed that Ramaphosa would donate three buffalos, 15 impala and 10 eland to the Matsila Wildlife Economic Project, a community game farming project. Matsila said the 500 hectare game farm was now worth about R5 million, because it currently has on it eight buffalo &not; including the three Ramaphosa donated &not;&ndash; as well as 25 antelope, in 15 impala and 10 eland Ramaphosa donated. &ldquo;This project will assist members of the community to pilot radical economic transformation. We appreciate the efforts of the deputy president to assist the members of the community to boost their economy,&rdquo; Matsila said.&ldquo;Most people are of a view that this industry of game farming is mostly for white people, but that&rsquo;s not the case. We want to see more black people being involved in wildlife farming. We requested assistance from the deputy president and he assisted us.&rdquo;But these developments ruffled the feathers of the youth league who blasted Ramaphosa who has been critical of President Jacob Zuma, calling for the judicial inquiry on the State Capture Report as recommended by former public protector Thuli Madonsela.Moremi said: &ldquo;The ANCYL in Limpopo declines the invitation and refuses to be part of buffalo parade in Matsila village. A stone&rsquo;s throw away, that village at Vuwani still stands (with) over 27 schools burnt and hungry people. Let&rsquo;s see if they vote for ANC,&rdquo; he said.Ramaphosa&rsquo;s spokesperson Ronnie Mamoepa said: &ldquo;Chief Matsila requested the donation of the wild animals to the community and he did exactly that. This event is a joint venture with a SANParks contribution. Ramaphosa has been involved with the community in farming.&rdquo; He added: &ldquo;In his farm at Lephalale he has been buying cattle from the community to assist them to support their families to get basic needs. He is doing it again this time at the request of the local chief. He is passionate about assisting the community and this time he is involved in game farming and wildlife. He wants to see the community being involved in wildlife.&rdquo;