On a day in which many of the favourites struggled in windy conditions, South African golfing veteran Ernie Els kept the country’s flag flying high at the Masters with a solid par round of 72. Thursday’s first round at Augusta National in the first major of the year, was played in blistering winds, with many of the pre-tournament favourites struggling to find good scores. The stand-out performance of the day belonged to world number 52 Charley Hoffman, who played a near-faultless 18 holes with a seven-under 65 to lead by four shots from unknown William McGirt. Hoffman shot nine birdies and two bogeys in his round. The day began with an even bigger shock though, as world number one Dustin Johnson had to withdraw from the tournament as he was standing on the first tee, having hurt his back the day before in fall in his house. Els, who six-putted the opening hole last year and missed the cut, said that he was nervous as he teed off. “But then I managed to put the ghosts behind me, even though I bogeyed the second.” Two more bogeys on the sixth and seventh saw him turn for home three-over. He then birdied the 13th, before managing three birdies in a row starting with the 15th. “I just managed to get the shots and then sank the putts. Sometimes it goes like that. If I had missed the putts, I would not be standing here and smiling,” he said. A dropped shot on the final hole saw him fall back to even par in tied 12th place. Els was the best South African in the field, followed by 2011 Masters champion Charl Schwartzel, who also rallied on the back nine to finish the round on two-over 74 after carding a disappointing 40 on the front nine.  Louis Oosthuizen and Brenden Grace finished on 76 and 77 respectively, with Grace describing conditions as brutal. “It was really gusting. At least if the wind is consistent, then it is not as difficult, but in this case, it was just gusting and with all those trees around it is really difficult. Grace was four over after just three holes, but then managed to find his composure. “I had a tough start out there, so I was pretty happy with a solid play after the three holes.” Oosthuizen was also content with his round, saying that conditions had made if very difficult. “Even on five-over, I am still in contention. The conditions are expected to be similar on Friday for the second round, so you can again expect the scores to be all over the place. “I was happy with my game. I left a lot of birdie chances out there. Had I made them, I could easily have gone home with a two-over instead of five-over.” 2008 Masters winner Trevor Immelman, shot a disappointing 79 and will have his work cut-out for him if he want to make it into the weekend. Jordan Spieth, Rory McIlroy and Jason Day, who were the favourites to challenge for the Green Jacket in Johnson’s absence, are several shots off the pace. McIlroy finished even par, while Day shot a two-over 74. Spieth finished the round on three-over 75.