People gathered at the social grants paypoint at the Rabasotho Community Centre in Tembisa on the East Rand, Gauteng, this morning, only to discover that they could not collect their monthly pay-outs as promised. Democratic Alliance shadow minister of social development, Bridget Masango, told City Press that it was &ldquo;absolutely heartbreaking&rdquo; to see this morning&rsquo;s developments. &ldquo;People had used the last of their money to hire minibus kombis in order to come and collect their money, yet they couldn&rsquo;t do so because the paypoint was not paying out their money,&rdquo; she said. The only communication from the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) was a hand-written makeshift sign that was put up, informing people that the payouts will take place from April 4 (tomorrow). &ldquo;It is an absolute mess here. People have travelled far to get here, and they are disappointed,&rdquo; Masango said. Masango, along with deputy chief whip of the Democratic Alliance and Lethabong Constituency Head, MP Mike Waters, visited the paypoint in order to see how the payments of social grants was progressing.&ldquo;All the grant recipients we spoke to, informed us that they were never told that they would not receive their grants today,&rdquo; Masango said. On March 17, Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini assured President Jacob Zuma and the country that there was no crisis at Sassa.Read:&nbsp;Saying grants won&rsquo;t be paid is akin to removing the government &ndash; Dlamini&ldquo;All eligible social grants beneficiaries will receive their money on April 1 and beyond,&rdquo; Dlamini said. &ldquo;We have, without fail been paying the right social grant, to the right person, at the right time and place since Sassa&rsquo;s establishment 10 years ago,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;This is yet another indication of the mess that is the Department of Social Development. Minister Bathabile Dlamini is clearly not in command of her department,&rdquo; Masango said. Dlamini said that the Rabasotho Community Centre was not scheduled for payment today. &ldquo;It is scheduled for payment from April 4 to 7 and beneficiaries were given slips last month that clearly state dates and venues. The DA should have simply asked people for these slips or contacted the call centre for assistance as was widely communicated. She said that if the members of the DA leaders had the best interest of South Africans at heart, they should have at least tried to find the correct information for the supposed stranded beneficiaries.&ldquo;It is clear that the DA is operating in desperation and we appeal to social grant recipients to go to their respective dates and venues as they appear on their slips given last month. Social grants are paid over 15 days beginning on the first day of each month and payment will continue until April 17 in Gauteng. Beneficiaries can call the toll-free&nbsp;Sassa call centre on 0800 60 10 11 to get assistance.