For many years, Ernie Els has been one of the most popular players on the professional golf circuit. The Big Easy won his first major as a 24-year-old, when he won the US Open in 1994 and added three more majors. He can also look back at 24 years at the Masters with 23 appearances. But though he came close on a few occasions, he is yet to wear the green jacket and it seems very unlikely that he will do so. In fact, Sunday's 78 in the fourth round that left him in last place on 20-over par, is likely to be his last round at Augusta as his five year exemption for winning the Open in 2012 runs out at the end of this year. He admitted that having not played that well in the last two rounds helped him not become too emotional. “I think if I had played better it would've been a different feeling, but it was a good weekend. But it was nice to play four rounds.” Els's disappointing round was sweetened by back-to-back birdies on the seventh and eighth, which left him with a broad smile. “If you play good shots and making birdies it is easy to have fun.” Three-time Masters winner Phil Mickelson said before the start of the tournament that he considered Els (with Greg Norman) as one of the greatest players never to have won the Masters, leaving him with the unfortunate record of being one of only three players (Lee Trevino and Rory McIlroy the others) to have won at least four majors without winning at Augusta National. He said that he accepted that it could well have been his last Masters. “I have won a lot of tournaments around the world, but this one is just one that seems to eluded me and that's fine. “Obviously there is still a chance that I can come back. I'm trying to win on the PGA Tour. I have won 19, but I want to get to 20. I am 48 this year and if I get back great, obviously. It is not totally out of the picture, but if it is, it is.” When City Press asked him what his best memories of the Masters were, The Big Easy flashed a cheeky smile. “Well, let me think about that. I think I have to go back maybe a decade or more. “I think the very first time is very, very special and in 1994 I played in some really great groupings. I played with Ben Crenshaw, then I played with Jose Maria Olazabel in the third round. He went on to win, so that was a great time. And then obviously the times I came close.” In 23 starts over 24 years, Els has managed six top 10 finishes and was runner-up twice, coming agonisingly close in 2004 when Mickelson holed a 18-foot putt to birdie the last to win by a shot. “But if I look back at the 23/24 years here, you know how many professional golfers get the opportunity to play the tournament 23 times. And having the chance to win it a couple of times was special, but at the end of the day, this tournament was just not for me.” He highlighted the tradition at the Masters, which he said was important. “The guys in the locker room are still the same guys and then the members I met over the years they're all similar people. It is an amazing event, so it has just been a special time. “To have been a part of it for 23/24 years is special. It is a place where most golfers dream of playing once or twice in a row, so to do it for so long was great.” As a major winner, Els will receive an invitation to return to the Masters as non-playing honorary invitee. “I would not put it out of the possibilities. I think I have got my brains beaten in enough here, so maybe to come back and have a couple of beers might be a different way to look at it. So yes, why not. I might come back and say hi to the guys and check it out. It is special.” As one of the most popular players at Augusta National it seems likely that The Big Easy will always receive a special welcome at the Masters – be that as an unlikely and unexpected participant, or as an honorary invitee.