The ANC stalwarts and veterans have called for a national consultative conference following the ANC Youth League's (ANCYL) disruption of Ahmed Kathrada&rsquo;s memorial on Sunday in Durban.The youth league disrupted ANC treasurer-general Zweli Mkhize and former minister of finance Pravin Gordhan, who were speakers at the memorial. The stalwarts condemned the actions of the ANCYL in a statement released this morning, saying &ldquo;it is an insult not only to Uncle Kathy&rsquo;s memory but an insult to all who have sacrificed so much in the name of participatory democracy, non-racialism and non-sexism&rdquo;. &ldquo;As a person who grew up in the ANC there are certain rules we are taught to respect,&rdquo; said ANC stalwart Wally Serote. He mentioned respect for consultation, democracy and non-racialism.The Kathrada Foundation also spoke out against the disruptions saying that &ldquo;drowning out people&rsquo;s views simply because you may differ with them is reflective of undemocratic behaviour&rdquo;.ANC KwaZulu-Natal chair, Sihle Zikalala, also condemned the disruptions but also argued that memorial services should not be used to advance political stances. &ldquo;We can&rsquo;t ventilate our feelings and anger in public, especially using memorial services and funerals&rdquo; said Zikalala on Radio 702&rsquo;s breakfast show with Xolani Gwala.&ldquo;As with any funeral of leaders and heroes of our liberation movement it is always a time for political mobilisation&rdquo; said the stalwarts. &ldquo;It is never, ever, a time for unacceptable behaviour and disruption as we saw by elements of the provincial youth league at the memorial service.&rdquo;Sharing this sentiment, The Kathrada Foundation said, &ldquo;we want to dispel the notion that funeral services and memorials can&rsquo;t be used to promote progressive political values. Calls for the depoliticisation of funerals and memorials of political leaders is simply another form of stifling divergent views.&rdquo;The stalwarts also brought up the issue of&nbsp;uMkhonto weSizwe Military Veterans deployed to protect Luthuli House.&ldquo;We also recently saw a group dressed in fatigues, similar to those worn by our comrades who served in Umkhonto weSizwe (MK), who said they were defending Luthuli House against an undefined enemy,&rdquo; they said. &ldquo;The majority whose age exposes them as too young to have ever served in MK; who are these people who believe that anyone can dress up as though they fought against apartheid in our military wing?&rdquo;They added that South Africa is a constitutional democracy and private armies are not needed. &ldquo;It is an insult to our fallen heroes and those who served without thought of material benefits.&rdquo; The call for the conference was in the hope of addressing the ANC crisis. Serote said that should a consensus be reached the stalwarts will suggest policy recommendations and ground rules to implement.&ldquo;If the ANC does not create unity based on the well-being and development of our country in the interests of all of our people, it will be punished by the very people who supported our movement during the fight against apartheid and at the ballot box,&rdquo; the combined statement said. A consultative conference will involve members of the Umkhonto weSizwe council, ANC leadership and the ANC stalwarts. The stalwarts and the veterans have said that they will organise one but have not confirmed a date.