Think this school year has just started? Think again. Gauteng Education MEC Panyaza Lesufi has announced the process for the 2018 online pupils admissions application &ndash; and it starts in less than a week. The 2018 admissions period will begin on May 2 at 8.30am and close on June 12 at midnight. The online system will only be available for pupils applying for Grade 1 and Grade 8. Parents can apply for pupils applying for Grades 2 to 6 or Grades 9 to 11 at their nearest school. Lesufi said the online application was &ldquo;fair&rdquo; because it &ldquo;eliminates arbitrary action by schools to discriminate and exclude&rdquo;. &ldquo;Our vision is to ensure that majority of learners study nearer to home for obvious efficiency and safety reasons. For that reason, we are making strides to ensure all our schools are sites of excellence.&rdquo; With the previous system, there were glitches on the day of its launch and parents had trouble securing spots.The department received 310 404 applications online last year, but as of December 2016 more than 10 000 applicants had blocked the system. Lesufi had said 10 403 applicants received offers for placement, but were yet to accept the offer. &ldquo;The people of Gauteng have spoken and we have listened about the challenges they have faced with the online system last year,&rdquo; the department said.Due to the problems that rose last year, the department had implemented new strategies to make the online system easier.For families and parents who don&rsquo;t have access to the internet, the department has opened at least 65 admission centres across the province.Additionally, there will be a video tutorial that users can download for assistance with the online system. The system will also allow users to choose their preferred language.The department &ldquo;urges&rdquo; parents to prepare the necessary documents required by the school as soon as possible.Supporting documents include an ID or passport, immunisation card, birth certificate and recent school reports. Placement announcements begin on July 24 and will last until September 29, according to the department. Parents will have seven working days to accept or reject the offer. The MEC also took a moment to offer condolences to the victims and families affected by the accident in Bronkhorstspruit on April 21. &ldquo;We are deeply saddened by the loss and we will do everything necessary to support the families.&rdquo; Eighteen of the victims killed were students.