Safa is expected to feature regularly at the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) following the dismissal of two more employees after a disciplinary committee hearing found them guilty. City Press has learnt that following the dismissal of Ephraim “Shakes” Mashaba last month, Sipho Nkumane and Dennis Tshabalala have also been shown the door. The third employee, director of competitions Balebetse Jeff Monnakgotla’s matter is still pending. But the fired employees are expected to approach the commission for either reinstatement or compensation. Mashaba has already taken the matter to the commission and the hearing is set for February 7. A high-ranking Safa official confirmed to City Press that the two were no longer employees of the association. The source said they were found guilty and dismissed with immediate effect. This comes almost a month after Mashaba suffered the same fate. “They are gone after being found guilty but they are expected to appeal the verdict through the CCMA, although we have not heard anything yet. “The only recourse they have is to go through to the CCMA as they cannot appeal inside [Safa],” said the source. “Jeff’s matter is still ongoing but signs are that he is also on his way out. “I think he is trying to negotiate a settlement before he could be shown the door.” Two months ago, City Press reported that three employees had been hauled before the DC for various charges. Nkumane, who was the national Under-17 manager, was accused of failing to organise visas for the team’s travel to India. The team had to return from the airport after they were refused permission to board a flight to India without visas. They were going to take part in the Brics tournament involving Brazil, Russia, China and the hosts. Tshabalala, head of schools sport, was accused of failing to organise the Kay Motsepe Schools Cup soccer tournament to the required standards. Safa chief executive Dennis Mumble declined to comment, saying these were internal matters between the employer and its employees. 