Former SABC boss Hlaudi Motsoeneng would not state his side of the story before the ongoing parliamentary inquiry into the public broadcaster, at least not in person. MPs from across the political party spectrum shot down a proposal by the United Democratic Movement for Parliament to invite the controversial Motsoeneng, who has been accused by several witnesses who appeared before the inquiry of undermining and usurping power from his bosses, sidelining and purging staff who differed with him using perceived political protection. The parliamentary inquiry has been probing the SABC board’s fitness to hold office – the board is made up of 12 non-executive members and three executives and for the better part of the last five years, Motsoeneng was chief operating officer of the corporation. UDM MP Nqabayomzi Kwankwa said his party was making the request for Motsoeneng to state his side of this story on the basis of the principles of natural justice. “In almost all the testimonies we heard as the committee, Mr Hlaudi Motsoeneng has been implicated in some or other form,” said Kwankwa. “We are finding it difficult to understand why we are denying him opportunity to either contradict or correct these claims against him. As Parliament we have a duty to ensure fair play in action. We cannot do that or help Parliament to adjudicate fairly in this matter when we hear evidence from one side without granting the affected party the opportunity to do the same,” said Kwankwa. “What then would cause us not to call Hlaudi Motsoeneng to appear before this committee?” he asked. But MPs, from the ANC, EFF, DA, IFP, ACDP and National Freedom Party all shot down the idea, accusing Kwankwa of opportunism by making such a request at this stage of the process. The ANC’s Jabu Mahlangu said during the inquiry process that Motsoeneng was removed by the court from his position but “in essence, he is a man on the street right now”. The committee had invited former SABC executives despite the fact that they were no longer working for the public broadcaster. Another ANC MP, Makhosi Khoza, said MPs should stop elevating Motsoeneng, turning him into some kind of a demagogue. “We had already afforded him an opportunity as part of the collective at the SABC and he never took advantage of that,” said Khoza. A number of MPs agreed, saying the inquiry was not about clearing Motsoeneng’s name but to bring the SABC back from the brink. Committee chairperson Vincent Smith said all those with an interest, including Motsoeneng will be able to respond to the draft report, which is expected to be made public next Tuesday. Kwankwa fought back, insinuating that a political agenda by the ANC or one of the ANC factions was behind the decision to not invite Motsoeneng. “We are not politically naïve; we know some of the political dynamics that have caused the ANC to say they don’t want Hlaudi to come here. We know how these things – at a factional position – are arrived at.” 