Actress Nomzamo Mbatha dazzled the crowd at yesterday’s 2017 L’Ormarins Queen’s Plate, held at Kenilworth Racecourse in Cape Town. She, along with a host of other celebrities, attended the 156-year-old event, known for its signature blue-and-white dress code. It is rated as being among the world’s top five horse-racing events by the UK’s Telegraph newspaper. On Thursday, Mbatha told City Press she was still undecided about what to wear on the day. She was spoilt for choice between a piece sent to her by Nigerian designer Toju Foyeh and a dress she bought online. In the end, she decided on the floral Foyeh pant suit, saying she “walked like a swan” in it. She said her designer had decided to play with pink “to showcase my delicate, sweet and feminine side without disrespecting the theme”. Foyeh travelled to South Africa from Nigeria for the specific purpose of bringing the outfit to Mbatha. “I love the ambience at L’Ormarin,” she enthused. “Champagne flows until the end and it is relatively easy to find yourself at a posh house in Clifton at the end of the night.” Actress and TV presenter Boity Thulo wore white pants and a crop top by Quiteria & George to mark her first time at the Queen’s Plate. She admitted to having been unsure what to wear, eventually deciding to keep it “clean and comfortable” with a white outfit. Former Miss South Africa and businesswoman Jo-Ann Strauss wore a white dress by KLuK CGDT, which was her second choice. Her son had hugged her and spoilt her first choice with sunscreen lotion. Actor Siv Ngesi was inspired by the style of abaThembu Chief Mandla Mandela in his choice of outfit, while top model Rosette Ncwana wore a design by NN Vintage, proclaiming: “Women come here for the fashion and a good time, and so do I.” With a new year comes new trends. Arguably, the hottest designer around at the moment is Gert-Johan Coetzee, who predicts that fringes, frills, lace and transparent pieces will be in vogue this year. “Fringes and lace are great for red-carpet events. They suit all body types,” he says. Coetzee expects to see classic Victorian-style frills making a comeback, as they are currently a hit in New York. “The sexy, sheer and transparent look was a favourite among the fashionistas last year and will keep its foothold, as it’s a great look you can rock in winter and summer. “African patterns, long sleeves and the boho-chic style are still prominent and current for this year,” he adds. For local red carpets, he advises us to be on the lookout for high, daring slits, contrasting pastel colours and rich, bold African palettes. He is excited about this year careerwise. “I have received a lot of requests from the US and will be designing outfits for a big US star’s world tour,” he said, declining to reveal names. Pretoria-based designer Orapeleng Modutle, who dressed media personality Bonang Matheba for a Glamour magazine fashion shoot last year, says clean lines and structure will be the trends for 2017. “The garden theme will dominate, with clothes sporting floral prints and lots of green,” he says. Pointing to wearable trends that have stood the test of time, he makes mention of denims and sequins. “But one particular trend that should be visible in a minimalist form this year is the tribal print.” Modutle foresees a lot of structural detail and peek-a-boo effects for the red carpet. He also hopes that underdressing and overembellishment will remain. “The trick is to make a statement without being over-the-top. “Jewel tones will make a very bold statement this year, with much softer tones for daytime glitzy functions.” Fashion designer and stylist Paledi Segapo says the current fashion statement is “fluid gender-neutral apparel”, meaning clothes men and women can wear. For extravagant events, such as the Metro FM Music Awards and horse-racing event the Sun Met, he says men may be pairing their suit jackets with matching skirts. “It’s the in thing for the brave.” However, for men who prefer to keep it classic, a windowpane suit – sporting a square-like pattern – willdo the trick. And for women? “Off-the-shoulder and see-through dresses went out of style in 2016. Fashion is all about being experimental and bold. “The no-no for me this year is looking like you’ve stepped out of a vintage museum.” And the big must-do this year? Designers say it’s about keeping one solid colour from head to toe. 