Donald Trump should tweet less, listen more, do a 360 degree about-turn on controversial campaign comments and pledges, build diversity and not isolate the US from the rest of the world. These are some of the (rather diplomatic) messages from political party leaders in South Africa on the inauguration of the Trump as the 45th president – which has sent shock waves across the globe. Democratic Alliance leader Mmusi Maimane warned that the decisions of the US had a domino effect on the global economy and particularly for Africa. Therefore, he urged Trump to make economic decisions that not only benefited people in the US but also those around the globe. “Second, President Trump needs to govern for all of the US not just Republicans or those who voted for him”. His election had divided the country by class, race and age. “He therefore needs to take deliberate steps to bring about unity and diversity”. “Trump must build a global stance that acknowledges the right of individuals, market-based economy and the role of the rule of law in the world,” said Maimane. United Democratic Movement leader Bantu Holomisa predicted Trump would face an uphill battle because of his remarks about minorities during his campaign. “He will have to make a 360 degree about-turn to make sure that those people in the US, who come from different parts of the world, are protected, safe and not discriminated against.” In terms of domestic relations, Holomisa said: “It is clear that the priority under this gentleman will be the US, so we mustn’t pin our hopes on the US to help us. With his Make America Great again strategy, he is looking inward. I don’t expect him to be worried about Africa. And we should not try to pressurise him. Instead, we should prioritise the development of our own countries. We have the resources. We don’t have to pin our hopes on foreign countries.” Congress of the People leader Mosiuoa Lekota said that while he was not a fan of Trump, American citizens had made their democratic choice. “He must be given a chance to lead. We wish him – and the US – well. Hopefully he can refine his policies so that the US makes a positive contribution to international relations.” African Christian Democratic Party leader Kenneth Meshoe said Trump was a businessman, not a politician, and he was going to make mistakes. “My advice would be to become a good listener, to learn from people who have experience who can guide him. “The best way of winning over the many people who are against his presidency is to talk less and do much. Trump needs to prove that he is a man that has America at heart, that he wants to see America become great again, as he campaigned. He needs to put the poor at the centre of his plan. If he does this and jobs are created, even those who didn’t want him might change their opinion. “I would advise him to stop tweeting as president. He is overdoing it, and it rubs people up the wrong way. Meshoe said: “Let’s give the man a chance. He might surprise us. Don’t write him off even though you may not agree with what he says.” Wishing Trump all the best, the Freedom Front Plus’s Pieter Groenewald does not side with the prophets of doom. He supported Trump’s pledge to put his country first, though he cautioned that there must be a balance. “You can’t be an island in the sea.” ANC chief whip Jackson Mthembu declined comment, saying it was not appropriate for his parliamentary office to send out messages for incoming presidents. » Julius Malema, leader of the EFF – which held its third annual plenum in Gauteng on Friday – had not responded to a request for comment at the time of filing this report. The South African presidency had also not responded.    