The South African health industry has suffered a major loss with the sudden death of chief executive and registrar of the Council for Medical Schemes (CMS) Humphrey Zokufa .Zokufa (64) died at a Pretoria hospital on Sunday after a short illness. Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi described his death as a great loss to the health sector in general and the medical scheme industry.&ldquo;We struggled a great deal in getting a suitable registrar for CMS and unfortunately now he is gone with the wealth of experience and skills he possesses.&rdquo; Zokufa was known as a strong believer on the National Health Insurance (NHI) system in South Africa. He joined the CMS in November last year. He had served in numerous roles in the public and private health sector, including as a registrar for the Medicine Control Council, where he played a key role in the establishment of the Medicine Pricing Committee.Before he joined the CMS, he was managing director for the Board of Healthcare Funders (BHF) of Southern Africa for almost 11 years and served on Work Stream 4 on the Role of Medical Schemes in the NHI plan.Elsab&eacute; Conradie, general manager for stakeholder relations at CMS, said Zokufa&rsquo;s passing would leave a void in the council. &ldquo;His energy and passion for an optimal and effective regulatory framework in the private healthcare industry was also clear.&ldquo;He was firm in his belief that the National Health Insurance is not a pipe dream and his dedication, commitment and vision to lead the private healthcare sector into participating in the NHI was his top priority.&rdquo;Conradie said: &ldquo;Dr Zokufa related well to people and although it was for only a very short period, the impact of Dr Zokufa&rsquo;s leadership was visible immediately, especially his care for the CMS staff. &ldquo;His energy and passion for an optimal and effective regulatory framework in the private healthcare industry was also clear.&rdquo; The Innovative Pharmaceutical Association of South Africa (Ipasa) paid tribute to Zokufa for bridging the gap between the public and private healthcare sectors.Konji Sebati, Ipasa chief executive, said it would take some time for the sector to realise the impact and setback of losing Zokufa.&ldquo;He had so many plans that were going to make ... strides to reform the local healthcare funding system.&rdquo; Ipasa president Timothy Kedijang said: &ldquo;As gutted as we are, we can only hope that the conversation that Dr Zokufa started continues, and his ideals to bridge the gap between the private and public healthcare system, his vision for positive changes in the healthcare landscape, and all his planned efforts will not be in vain.&rdquo;The board of healthcare funders said Zokufa will be remembered for his willingness to talk to people regardless of their politics. &ldquo;He spoke out against escalating private healthcare costs. He was concerned about the lack of growth in the number of people that join medical aid schemes. And was committed to finding ways to reverse this trend,&rdquo; said Clarence Mini, the BHF&rsquo;s acting managing director.Zokufa was buried in Pretoria yesterday. He is survived by his wife, four children and two grandchildren.