Parliament has been urged to recommend an investigation into the activities of the State Security Agency at the SABC in the wake of testimony during the inquiry into the public broadcaster. In a written submission to the ad hoc committee that is conducting the probe into the SABC, the Right2Know civic organisation’s Murray Hunter calls for the Office of the Inspector-General of Intelligence to conduct the probe and to act “with maximum speed and maximum transparency”. It also requests that the ad hoc committee’s findings include recommendations to protect whistleblowers and to protect journalistic freedom at the public broadcaster, and to review the SABC’s internal investigation process to ensure it did not target perceived “dissenters” with the SABC or clamp down on critics. Communications surveillance – in the form of phone tapping and email tapping – was also redflagged. In a supplementary submission that was sent to the committee on Monday, the R2K said that surveillance had become a regular feature of scandals around the SABC. “Despite this there have been a number of problematic incidents that suggest, at best, employee communications are not adequately protected against interception; at worst that SABC staff may be subject to unlawful interception of communications.” Hunter said that there were no internal stipulations that guide or restrict how SABC employees’ electronic communication may be monitored and intercepted. He referred to former SABC chairperson Ellen Tshabalala reportedly telling staff in an editorial meeting in January 2014 that their communications might be intercepted by intelligence services, apparently in relation to perceived information leaks. The SSA’s role in vetting SABC employees and directors was a subject of controversy, according to the R2K. The submission notes that the SSA’s “vaguely defined and expansive role” in security-related matter has contributed to a “climate of fear” at the public broadcaster and created substantial risk of abuse and clampdown. “This needs to be addressed urgently in a review, or the concerning practices which have spooked SABC workers will surely repeat themselves not only at the public broadcaster, but at other public bodies as well.” After wrapping up oral testimony on Friday, members of the ad hoc committee were due to receive a working document late on Monday. This will be deliberated on in meetings on Thursday and Friday this week. A draft report is due to be finalised by February 24, with copies to be distributed to the SABC – for comment only – until February 9. Ruling out the possibility anymore witnesses being called, committee chairperson Vincent Smith said people wishing to provide more information could do so in writing until January 24. Their affidavits would be considered for the final report. The committee has the arduous task of finalising its report amid a number of inconsistences and contradictions in evidence led, and the possibility that some witnesses may have misled Parliament. » The spy watchdog post of Inspector-General of Intelligence has been vacant since early 2015, raising concerns that there have been gaps in oversight. After a few failed attempts, the National Assembly recommended Dr Sethlomamaru Isaac Dintwe to the top position at the end of the parliamentary term last year.     