Orlando Pirates will have a new coach before the end of the month. This was revealed by club chairman Irvin Khoza, who said they were racing against time to get the man before their league game against Bidvest Wits on February 3. Pirates have been without a coach since the departure of Turkish mentor Muhsin Ertugral in November. Ertugral left in a huff after his side’s ignominious 6-1 defeat to SuperSport United in a league game. Augusto Palacios has been acting in the post but positive results have not been forthcoming with Pirates lying 10th on the table. They have won just three and lost as many games of the eight,, in all competitions, they have played since Ertugral’s departure. On Friday, Khoza told City Press that they had engaged with 10 coaches for the vacant position and were hopeful they would have their man soon. Only three of the 10 were locals, according to Khoza, but could not reveal their identities. “We are hoping to have the new coach by the end of the month. It is not easy to get someone who can coach Pirates but I am confident we will have someone soon,” said Khoza. He also revealed they have bolstered the side with three players from Chippa United. The players are defenders James Okwuosa and Marc van Heerden and midfielder Thembinkosi Lorch, who was on loan at the Chilly Boys. Khoza said it was important to reinforce the side ahead of the resumption of the league next month. “We realised our shortcomings at the back hence we went for Okwuosa and we want Mark as a cover for Patrick [Phungwayo] and Thabo [Matlaba]. We have not been consistent in that department but hopefully our problems would be solved.” He said defender Justice Chabalala would go the opposite direction on loan until the end of the season. Khoza also revealed that Equatorial Guinea goalkeeper Felipe Ovono would go for assessment at a Turkish club, which has shown interest in him. He also confirmed that Senegal midfielder Issa Sarr had extended his contract with the Buccaneers. Khoza said the club was happy to see their captain Oupa Manyisa back at training, a week after losing his two-week-old baby. “We are happy to see him back because it is never easy to lose your loved one.” 