Speaking at Vilakazi Street in Soweto yesterday ahead of the ANC’s 105 birthday celebration, President Jacob Zuma made yet another daring statement likening the birth of the ANC to that of Jesus Christ. “Just like the son of God was brought to earth to die for our sins, the ANC was born to end poverty and better the lives of black South African citizens,” Zuma said, adding that the members of the ANC should not be doubtful of what it is capable of. Hundreds of South Africans from all races and backgrounds flocked to the famous Vilakazi Street, where Nelson Mandela once resided, to listen to Zuma who spoke publically for the first time this year. The ANC were in the area to rally its supporters to attend the organisations birthday bash on Sunday at Orlando Stadium. The president also drew parallels between the local government elections and a game of football saying that the ruling party merely lost out in certain municipalities on penalties. "The ANC only lost on penalties where mistakes do happen. If we were to go to the elections now, we would show them who is the best.” Zuma warned those in attendance that if they go against the ANC, they will be going against South Africa and therefore will be in a fight with themselves. He went on to encourage supporters of the ANC to stick with the ruling party and always vote for the ANC no matter what happens. “When a bus breaks down in the middle of the road, people do not get off the bus and walk to their final destinations. They wait until the problem is fixed and get back on the road once more,” Zuma said in isiZulu. Zuma was not alone in Soweto, he was accompanied by several ANC members including Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, Andrew Mlangeni and provincial leaders David Makhura, Paul Mashatile and Free State premier Ace Magashule.   The president stressed that 2017 should be the year of unity within the ANC, adding that only the enemy can benefit from the ANC’s factionalism.“Come together and unite. Do not fight each other because when we fight one another, we are strengthening the power of the enemy,” he said. The pre-celebrations at Vilakazi were also an opportunity for street vendors and other individuals to benefit from the mass crowds. All Restaurants were packed and the streets were congested as many people showed up in support of the event.   The president concluded his time on the podium by singing his signature revolutionary song ‘Indlela’ before a cake in ANC colours was shared amongst the elderly. Zuma will deliver the ANC's annual January 8 statement during Sunday's event. 