Last night’s group D encounters at the Africa Cup of Nations saw Egypt come away with a comfortable 1-0 victory over Ghana while Mali managed to edge Uganda by the same score on a slippery pitch at the Stade d’Oyem. The Pharaohs went in front just 10 minutes into the clash, courtesy of Mohamed Salah’s bullet free kick which rifled through the Ghanaian wall and straight passed a helpless Razak Brimah The Black Stars however showed a great sense of urgency after conceding this early as they pressed high up the pitch in an attempt to draw level. Hopes of a victory were slightly diminished in the 41st minute when captain Asamoah Gyan pulled out of the match with a suspected hamstring injury. Aston Villa forward Jordan Ayew replaced the injured Gyan and made his presence felt late in the second half when he combined with his brother Andre Ayew to produce a shot which was blocked by a rock-solid Egyptian defence. Ayew caused more problems towards the beginning of stoppage time but his efforts were in vain as the referee blew the final whistle, handing Egypt the three points which would secure them a place in the quaterfinals. The Pharoah’s victory over the Black Stars meant Uganda and Mali’s result would have no consequence in the group. Mali managed to beat Uganda by a single goal but all of that meant little as both Ghana and Egypt progressed to the last eight. Algeria and Ivory Coast are the only teams in the top five African nations to have crashed out in the group stages of this year’s tournament, while Senegal, Tunisia and Egypt all made the cut. The Desert Foxes’ failure to reach the knockout stages prompted Belgian coach Georges Leekens to quit as national team coach following his side’s 2-2 draw with Senegal on Monday. Zimbabwe head coach Callisto Pasuwa will also join the list of coaches who will be handing over their positions. This comes after the Warriors succumbed to a 4-2 defeat to Tunisia on Monday which saw the only southern African side bow out in sheer disappointment. “I believe I have done my best in all the circumstances and once I get home I will tender my resignation to pave way for another person to take over,” Pasuwa said. The quarterfinals get underway on Saturday when Burkina Faso takes on Tunisia at the Stade d’Angondje at 18:00 followed by Senegal and Cameroon at the Stade de Franceville at 21:00. DR Congo will face Ghana at the Stade d’Oyem on Sunday at 18:00 before Egypt encounters a resurgent Moroccan side at the Stade de Port Gentil at 21:00. 