Labour Minister Mildred Oliphant’s move to protect the ANC-aligned Chemical, Energy, Paper, Printing, Wood and Allied Workers Union (Ceppwawu) has been slammed as “irrational and invalid”. The Labour Appeal Court on Wednesday ruled on the long-running saga of Oliphant’s removal of Johan Crouse as registrar of labour. It affirmed an earlier labour court ruling which also found Oliphant’s behaviour irrational. She booted Crouse out of his position as registrar after he refused to halt the deregistration of Ceppwawu in 2015. How Crouse was sacked A notice of intention to cancel Ceppwawu’s registration was originally published in the Government Gazette in August 2014. The union had failed to produce financial records for five years or prove that it held the meetings required of a registered union. In April 2015, Crouse launched an urgent court application to put Ceppwawu under administration. Shortly thereafter Oliphant wrote to him saying: “I call on you to suspend the Labour Court application until such time you have briefed me properly”. By that time Crouse had been registrar of labour for 20 years and had never had to check a deregistration with the minister before. According to the ruling, Crouse offered to meet the minister, but got no reply and went ahead with the application to deregister Ceppwawu. In July 2015, Crouse got a letter from the director-general of the department of labour commanding him to stop the application. This time Crouse was threatened with the prospect of having to pay the legal costs of the application himself. The department then circumvented Crouse and ordered the state attorney to withdraw from the case. Days later Crouse was accused of “gross insubordination” and replaced as registrar. This week’s court ruling relates to this decision to remove him as registrar. Did the minister unlawfully interfere? The three judges however said it was “lamentable” that the minister’s alleged interference in the registrar’s work was not dealt with. “In the absence of a cross-appeal from Mr Crouse we cannot determine whether the minister unlawfully interfered with the registrar’s functioning,” they wrote. However, the ruling goes on to point out that there was no legal basis for expecting the registrar of labour to “report or account to the minister”. “Another point of significance is that the minister is not empowered to perform the very functions of the registrar,” the judges noted. Ceppwawu was never suspended or deregistered. 