Members of Parliament (MPs) have accused the North West government of &ldquo;tampering with nature&rdquo; by removing all the females and leaving only male buffalo at two national parks as part of a controversial game donation to a private consortium. Altogether, the province&rsquo;s rural, environmental and agricultural development department approved a donation of about 150 buffalo, 50 rhino and 50 sable antelope from seven of their parks &ndash; worth in excess of R100 million.The department&rsquo;s MEC, Manketsi Tlhape, and other senior officials returned to Parliament last week after being hauled over the coals in November last year and asked to account for the donation.Admitting that due diligence had not always been followed, the department had been asked to supply follow-up documentation about the impact of the donation project on the viability of the breeding potential of the remaining population at their parks, among other questions.In a presentation to the environmental affairs portfolio committee last week, the department justified the donations, saying that there had been &ldquo;no negative impact&rdquo;. It said that the animals had faced challenges &ndash; from severe poaching to competition from other animals and nutritional deficiencies &ndash; and that is why they were identified for the project. But dissatisfied MPs questioned why all 13 female buffalo at Molemane Eye were donated, leaving 11 males at the park. At Borakalalo, all seven females were donated, leaving a male-only population of 18.Portfolio committee chairperson Phillemon Mapulane said that he was &ldquo;sorry to labour the point&rdquo;, but by having only bulls remaining affected their breeding potential and this was against conservation policy. Zoning in only on Molemane Eye, he said: &ldquo;They may end up fighting among one another. So, if you want to address the problem, why take all the females? This is tampering with nature. They must mate, reproduce. Now they are alone. They are frustrated, and could be busy fighting one another. How is this sustainable? It was really wrong.&rdquo;Tlhape, accompanied by head of department Poncho Mokaila and director of biodiversity Jonathan Denga, then admitted that the welfare of the male buffalo could be affected, and they would also be removed as soon as possible.The delegation said, however, that at Molemane Eye, the females had been moved first due to feeding challenges, especially for lactating females, where supplementary feeding had needed to be introduced. At Borakalalo the buffalo were under threat from poaching and security needed to be heightened.Tlhape said that as custodians of wildlife, there had been a game-donation policy in place since 1994. The conservation project was linked to efforts to transform ownership patterns and empower new entrants to the wildlife industry.She said that the parks would reap the benefits of the donations in the long term, as it was tied in with a breeding programme. &ldquo;We have 14 parks. What we are doing with this project is identifying beneficiaries and going into partnership with a consortium to breed,&rdquo; she said.But the chair said it was &ldquo;disingenuous&rdquo; to say that the animals would be coming back after breeding, as the project fell under the definition of a &ldquo;donation&rdquo; programme.MPs also raised questions about why two of the beneficiaries were a &ldquo;formerly advantaged white father and son&rdquo;. This went against the transformation mission of the programme, which was to shift ownership patterns of game parks in the province.Parliament would support a programme promoting empowerment and transformation. &ldquo;But a programme that is actually anti-transformation is not a good programme, and this is what it happening in this project.&rdquo;The donations were made through the Southern Africa Rare Game Breeders&rsquo; Association, which submitted its application in November 2014.Summing up, Mapulane said that it was vital to intervene. The committee would draw up recommendations and requested that the department continue to put a hold on its donation programme. &ldquo;Something clearly went wrong in the project, and we can&rsquo;t leave it at that,&rdquo; said Mapulane.TALK TO USDo you think the province should continue managing its parks if it has problems to even feed the animals? Who should run the parks instead?SMS us on 35697 using the keyword PARKS and tell us what you think. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50