During the dark days of apartheid when killings were rife, the town of Sedibeng, Vereenining, faced a number of massacres. Today marks the 25th anniversary of one such massacre – the Sebokeng Zone 7 Massacre – in which more than 30 people lost their lives and 40 more were injured. On the night of January 12 1991, a peaceful night vigil was being held in an overcrowded tent to mourn the loss of community leader and ANC member Christopher Nangalembe. Nangalembe had been captured and murdered a week earlier, after his body was discovered in a nearby rubbish dump. As mourners prayed peacefully, a group of unknown assailants suddenly stormed the tent, and without warning began firing random rounds of live ammunition into the crowd. 25 years later, the events of that night have not been forgotten, and this morning members of the community along with municipality officials gathered to commemorate the lives of the victims. “In honour of the victims of this catastrophic event, the Sedibeng District Municipality procured and unveiled the tombstones for the victims of Nangalembe Night Vigil Massacre, now known as Zone 7 Night Vigil Massacre,” a statement read. At around 8am today, a wreath-laying ceremony was held where Executive Mayor of the Emfuleni Local Municipality, Councillor Mahole Simon Mofokeng, spoke of the significance of the day on the political history of South Africa and thanked all those who attended the morning’s events. “I further thank you for your kind words of welcoming all of us in this important historic event in our region, the province and country where we remember our loved ones who paid the supreme price by losing their lives in the quest of democracy that we are enjoying today,” Mofokeng said.   Sebokeng played a vital role in the fight for freedom, after also enduring the Sharpeville Massacre in 1960. The township of Sharpeville is located within the Sedibeng region, and it is where former President Nelson Mandela signed the final draft of the Constitution into law in 1996.  