Another inmate has died at St Albans prison in Port Elizabeth. The prisoner, whose name hasn’t been released, died yesterday after falling ill while on a hunger strike. Prisoners gave up their hunger strike on Sunday because their demands were met by prison officials, but he became ill and was admitted to the prison hospital on Sunday evening.2016 ended off on a chaotic note for the prison, when another fight broke out between officials and the inmates who were on the hunger strike on New Year’s Eve. The lockdown that had been put in place after the first attack on warders at the prison on December 26 (which resulted in the death of three inmates) was partially lifted – provincial commissioner Nkosinathi Breakfast said yesterday that offenders were allowed to phone their families again, as well as receive visitors. There was a heavy presence of police, some in riot gear, on the last day of the year, when about 48 prisoners housed in the Maximum A section, who were reportedly some of those on a hunger strike, were involved in a physical stand-off with their guards and the police. Their demands included leaving their cells (they alleged they were locked up 24 hours a day), being allowed medical treatment when injured, and that the warders involved in the fight on December 26 be removed because the inmates alleged they constantly threatened them. One of two videos sent by two inmates from inside Maximum A showed a large number of prison warders and inmates fighting inside the courtyard of the section on New Year's Eve. The first video recorded from inside a cell showed 12 inmates reportedly from Cell 3 in the Maximum A section, walking slowly from the dining hall, back to the cells. Your browser does not support the video tag. “The inmates are on day four of the hunger strike which started on the 26th,” said the inmate. “They take between 20 and 30 minutes to walk between their cells and the dining hall. They are weak because we are on a hunger strike,” he said. During a telephonic conversation, he said they wanted an independent body to come and listen to their plight. “We have been talking to the ‘Rhulumente’ [the prison bosses]. They are not willing to deal with what we are crying about, so an independent body must now come and help us,” he said. The second video showed a fight between prison warders and inmates, in the same Maximum A courtyard. From the video, it appeared that the warders, with a black dog, were caught up in a fight with the prisoners. Your browser does not support the video tag. It was captured from the window of a cell adjacent to the fight. An inmate is heard shouting that the other inmates must just kill the warders, once and for all. “Fadalani once bafowethu [Kill them once],” shouted the inmate. “Mazihlatywe ***** ezik*k* [F*cking stab these sh*ts],” shouted the voice. Two prison warders confirmed that the video footage was an accurate depiction of what happened that day and added the inmates didn’t want to eat. “Their stomachs are flat right to the back, you can see they have no energy at all,” one said. “The situation is very bad and what is shown in the videos is exactly as things happened inside St Albans Maximum A,” he said. The second warder confirmed the presence of the emergency vehicles. “What is going on in there is hectic, it is frightening to think that when you prepare to go to work, you might not even come back,” he said. “Things are really, really bad inside there.” A police official in one of three police vans that drove out said they tried to calm the situation. Speaking very briefly at the gate, as they left, he said others remained to ensure calm inside. One woman visiting a prisoner said as they made their way into the awaiting trial section, the prison siren went off. “We became concerned because we know that it means something serious is happening inside,” she said. “The warders said we should not be concerned because they were testing the system,” “There was nothing in the section we visited.” A man who said they were visiting his wife’s brother’s son said when they arrived there were about eight vehicles inside the prison yard. “It was a combination of emergency vehicles like fire fighters, ambulances and police vans,” he said. Breakfast denied that there was a hunger strike taking place at the facility. “The inmates are not on hunger strike. They barricaded the entrance points in one division, Maximum A, and police were called in to remove the barricades,” said Breakfast. “There are about 1640 inmates in that section. Of those only 250 are eating their meals,” he said. He said when prisoners go on a hunger strike, they have to sign forms indicating the decision. “We then remove them and put them in isolation so they can be monitored,” said Breakfast. He said when the officials managed to open the section, they searched the inmates and found food inside their cells. “They have food items like Morvite and other types of cereal and they are eating everything inside there. It’s just prison food that they are refusing to take,” he said. He said the situation at the prison was calm. 