Controversial local entertainer Zodwa Wabantu is no diplomat – she is just out to make her hard-earned cash, no matter what foreign MPs may think. She said she was unaware of reports alleging that Lesotho MPs were opposed to her performing at an upcoming event in Maseru on December 22. “I’m an entertainer, not a politician,” she quipped. Zodwa said there was no official communication from Zimbabwe and Lesotho stopping her from visiting and performing. Zodwa has performed both locally and internationally as a dancer for a variety of artists. Last month she performed in Birmingham for DJ Bongz’s UK tour, and only a few days later she stole the show at the ninth annual Feather Awards when she won Drama Queen of the Year. Zimbabwe was the first to disapprove of her pending visit there this week, while Lesotho Prime Minister Thomas Thabane reportedly wrote to all border posts this week ordering officials not to allow Zodwa into the country. This was after the whole Parliament debated why she should be declared a persona non grata in Lesotho. Reports from Lesotho’s local media stated that the entertainer was a hot topic during parliamentary discussions as MPs subsequently reached a consensus that her performance would “violate Lesotho laws, religion, morals, customs and values”. Zodwa confirmed to City Press on Friday that she was booked and paid to perform in Lesotho. “I don’t know about any ban by MPs. I’m also going to Zimbabwe on the 6th, 7th and 8th. I think people who try to stop me, they’re using their power where it’s not needed,” she said. Zodwa also raised eyebrows in Zimbabwe during her recent visit. In September, the Durban socialite earned the ire and criticism of former president Robert Mugabe, who lambasted her for apparently not wearing panties while she danced. Despite being a diplomatic headache, Zodwa has repeatedly said business was booming for her. Her Instagram profile @zodwalibram is just one of the platforms where she assures fans and critics of her success. In a video post she wrote: “I don’t slay, I make money moves. Any stage you see me on this was paid R35 000 [sic]. “I won’t slay with my money. I have a house with my money. Three bedroom, dining room, kitchen, bathroom and garage. Mine not renting. No bank, cash. We slay differently.” Her parting shot on the latest controversy was: “They should be politicians and leave us as entertainers.”