Rapper Kwesta drops his music video for his smash hit Spirit, featuring American rapper Wale, on SABC 1 at 9.30pm tonight. According to the artist, this is one of his most expensive music videos to date which cost him almost a R1 million and was shot in just 23 hours. Kwesta, real name Senzo Mfundo Vilakazi, released Spirit in October and from day one his fans were blown away with many believing it could reach Ngud’ level of popularity. The music video, exclusively seen by City Press, captures the lifestyle and chronicles of growing up in the ‘hood’. It also gives a sense of motivation and hope that no matter where you come from you should always keep your spirit high because one day you’ll make it big in life. The four minute music video was shot in Kwesta’s hometown of Katlehong, Ekurhuleni, and in Zone 6 nightclub, Soweto. One of the popular faces in the music video is none other than mayor of Ekurhuleni, Mzwandile Masina. The director behind the music video needs no introduction. South African filmmaker and director, Tebogo Malope has worked as a director on popular television shows such as: Skeem Saam, Ayeye, and Complicated. In June this year, he won the Cannes Lions award for best use of film for a commercial he did with Cadbury International and Ogilvy South Africa. “We spoke about what the song meant to [Kwesta] and what the song represents and his response was very vast. I spoke to different people on what the song meant to them and I realised that it wasn’t one specific thought. What I came up with was something that covers so much about what it is like growing up in the hood with all sorts of dynamics, whether it is social or political and I did my best to incapsulate all of those aspects and the thoughts,” Malope said. He has also directed music videos for our own Nakhane Toure, Nigerian rappers D’banj and Burna Boy as well as Davido, to mention just a few. “The hardest challenge was to capture every aspect in four minutes and not to feel like there is an aspect of Kasi life that I’ve missed out on,” he said. 