Political satirist Majakathata the Rogue blasted his way in to City Press with his wit, charm and unique view of the cowntry, as he calls it, quickly endearing himself to readers. Here he takes a look at 2017, and highlights some of his favourite stories of the year 1. Son of Sadiki, who is not only a lensman but the best Azania has to offer, upped the bar with this fantastic piece about a white Sangoma whom I will definitely consult for beer advice soon. This is the land of the gods, all gods including Dionysus, no discrimination. In this piece and video, one gets an eye-opening angle of this cowntry of ours away from the politics and it is very refreshing. READ: When dreams call 2. Penned by two of the best scribes around, this piece demonstrated how unsafe we all are and even prompted me to call Media Park to get the contact details of Mbaks so I can offer my protection – of course in exchange for a few cases of SAB’s finest brown-bottled brew. Needless to say the two rogues were uncooperative. If the minister of the copshops is running for his life, who are we as laymen of Skomplaas not to be afraid of what is happening in this Zupta Republic. READ: Secret plot to oust Mbaks 3. A pure demonstration of power of the only black economy – call them whatever you may – the taxi industry pulled off a modern day miracle and showed the powers that be that in addition to owning the roads we all drive on, they can drive the interest rates too. It was also in the week that the Safa house honchos recycled Baxter as their favourite incompetent saviour. Time told. And Son of Malema of the Economic Freedom Fighters brigade also attempted to dictate to MyMoney about the Helen Zille saga – laughable illusion of power he had that one. My beloved Mashishing even made it to the woke media that week after Son of Yende outed those security gods at our copshops. Amenu! READ: Taxiville lessons: How to cut interest rates and only reshuffle the traffic 4. Now this piece angered me, to the extent that I had to go to Konkodi’s tavern and exhaust my grace overdraft. Two cases were insufficient because Mangethe’s curry campaign was just too heavy for my already unwelcome sobriety. To make it worse, Royal Bafokeng hired that Gupta company Bona baya kwini! (serves them right!) READ: Zwane allegedly targets Royal Bafokeng mines for cutting off Gupta company • Majakathata the Rogue is a comrade, director of Nahab (National Association of Husbands and Boyfriends) and chairperson of Asphuzeni Stokvel in Skomplaas, Mashishini. He pens in his personal capacity as a veteran patron of SAB.    