Nissan South Africa ends the year on a high note, as Melinda Ferguson gets behind the wheels of the mighty V8 off and on-roader, the Nissan Patrol. While Nissan has achieved record sales globally in 2017, the local market over the last few years has been less impressive. But 2017 has been a game changing year for Nissan South Africa with the launch of a showroom of impressive product by way of the tough and capable Navara, the nippy Micra, and the world’s bestselling SUV, the X-Trail. Last week the flagship of the range, the Nissan Patrol, a highly stylish and mighty off-roader, ended the year for the Japanese manufacturer on a high note. The Patrol’s been around for almost seven decades, having launched back in 1951. The new Patrol will give serious offroaders, loyal to the likes of the legendary Toyota Land Cruiser, some serious torque to chew on. What makes the new Patrol tempting is an impressive blend of comfort, tech and breathtaking 4x4 capability. Being a bit of a luxury queen, the first things I noticed as I got into the huge black Patrol that I tested on a launch, were the sumptuous tan leather seats. I’m also always drawn to tech and sound so imagine my pleasure as the Bose audio system kicked in, replete with 13 speakers, a subwoofer and digital amplifier transporting one to acoustic heaven. The cool tech continues with two screens mounted into the back headrests of the front seats, offering a multi-screen DVD entertainment system, a sure fire winner for keeping the kids entranced on long journeys – which could go on forever with the Patrol’s enormous 140 litre fuel tank. But it’s the ample space available in this seven-seater that really impresses. The Patrol is huuuge. I was engulfed in amazing leg and head room on the activity-filled launch where I got to play as both passenger and pilot. Rating: 4 Stars And it’s not just driver and passenger seating space that impresses. I was constantly spoilt for choice having to select where I’d stash my water and coffee with the Patrol’s four bottle and nine cup holders. There’s plenty more to get swoony over, including a sunroof, Nissan Intelligent Key with Push Button Start and power door locks with illuminated switches which all come standard. Intelligent Mobility provides Nissan’s most advanced technology to date and includes amazing driver assist like Intelligent Blind Spot Intervention, Intelligent Distance Control, Intelligent Driver Awareness and Intelligent Lane Intervention. But over above the tech and plush, the Patrol, powered by a robust, high-tech 5.6-litre V8 petrol engine, with 298kW of power and 560Nm of torque (with 3.5 tonne tow capacity) is a dream to drive both on road and off. For the keen off roader, scaling rock, sand and mountain is a synch with the Patrol’s All-Mode 4-wheel drive system which features Auto/4H/4LO modes and an electronically controlled part-time transfer case. On normal roads, the system operates in two-wheel drive mode, but hit the off and beaten track and torque is distributed to all four wheels. If you’re in the holiday mood and up for a luxurious tough adventure, check out the Patrol.     