Adding a running race to the 5km walk has ensured that the Mandela Remembrance Walk and Run has entered the big league – boasting 20 000 entrants this year, all coming together in Pretoria on Sunday in memory of former president Nelson Mandela. This year was the first time that the 10km run was included – the event used to be a 5km walk – and it was won by none other than South African marathon champion Sibusiso Nzima. Nzima, who competed in the marathon event at the 2015 World Championships in Athletics in Beijing and at the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, came back from a groin injury to take the 10km title in 30.17. The winner of the women’s race was Rudo Mhonderwa in 35.08 “I am so happy to have won because it boosts my confidence after the injury. I was struggling from the groin injury. Now it has healed and I am back to my form,” Nzima told City Press. The 22-year-old Mhonderwa was jubilant. “I am very happy that I won this because I have been training very hard the past two weeks,” she said. The Zimbabwean is on fire – last week she also claimed gold in the Heroes’ Marathon in Mthatha. She also ran the in 10km race and won in 37:54 Almost 20 000 participants turned up for the Pretoria event. Before leading the walk with Nelson Mandela Foundation trustee Maya Makanjee and the province’s MEC for Sports, Faith Mazibuko, Gauteng Premier David Makhura directed a moving tribute to the world icon during a wreath-laying ceremony in front of the Mandela statue on the Union Buildings’ lawn “My friend of 65 years, Nelson Mandela, wanted to be the first black advocate in South Africa, but was prevented from achieving that dream by a dean who thought black people couldn’t be advocates,” said stalwart George Bizos, who represented Mandela in the infamous Treason Trial. “Despite that, Mandela went on to become a formidable lawyer and world icon. If he were here today, witnessing how South Africa belongs to all those who live in it, he would be very proud,” Bizos added. All proceeds raised from the entry fees are donated to The Nelson Mandela Foundation to continue with the work the foundation does to preserve and promote the Madiba legacy.