From traditional to white weddings, from the expected nuptials to those that left South Africa shocked ... Ntombizodwa Makhoba looks back on a year of romance. Khaya Mthethwa and Ntandoyenkosi Kunene I must say we didn’t see this one coming.... most of us were shocked when we woke up to the news that gospel artist Khaya Mthethwa and Miss SA 2015 Ntandoyenkosi Kunene were getting married in a traditional wedding which was held in Piet Retief, Mpumalanga. Mthethwa was once rumoured to be engaged to Nomzamo Mbatha, but later he was romantically linked to actress Jessica Nkosi. Apparently the newlyweds were rumoured to have been dating for less than five months before they said I do. Those close to them said Mthethwa was pressurised by his family to quickly make Kunene umakoti because he was a pastor and must practice what he preached. Minenhle “Minnie” Dlamini and Quinton Jones The wedding of the year goes to: TV darling Minnie Dlamini and her bae of more than five years, Quinton Jones, a professional photographer. Everything was just perfect, from the wedding gown, to the venue and decoration. Their star-studded wedding affair was attended by A-list celebrities including Basetsana Kumalo, Somizi Mhlongo and Unathi Msengana, and was held at the Lourensford Wine Estate in Somerset West in the Western Cape. VuzuTV announced that the first episode of her three-part documentary, Becoming Mrs Jones, was the highest rated show in Vuzu Amp history. Now we can’t wait for their first child. Reggie Nkabinde and Beauty Matela The treasurer-general of the ANC Youth League and the boss of record label Mabala Noise tied the knot with his love of nine years, Beauty Matela, in a lavish ceremony at the exclusive wedding venue of Lynton Hall, in Umzinto on KwaZulu-Natal’s South Coast. Linda Mtoba and Steven Meyer Linda Mtoba who plays Zama Ngwenya on hit drama Isibaya, broke many admirers’ hearts when she announced that she was off the market earlier this year. Mtoba got married to her long-time boyfriend of six years, Steven Meyer. Some men didn’t take the news well; they even went as far as volunteering to be husband number two. Quinton ‘Naked D’ Masina and Naledi Willers Metro FM producer Quinton Masina, better known as the Naked DJ, got married to his Botswana beauty queen, Naledi Willers, earlier in March this year. However, it seems Masina has been married before, he was married to a woman named Bulelwa who featured on his younger twin sisters’ [Ntando and Hlelo] reality show, Blame It On Fame. Siyabonga ‘Slikour’ Metane and Melissa Wilkinson Former Skwatta Camp member Siyabonga “Slikour” Metane married his long time friend Melissa Wilkinson. The couple had been together for five years and had their traditional wedding in May. Metane previously dated Bonang Matheba. “I haven’t been in a relationship like that with anybody... It’s one of those things you learn in time that do you waste time, or do you just pack this, put it in a case, give it a real name, officialise it and then move on to the next thing and the next journey in life.” 