  South Africa continued to dominate in the Cosafa region after lifting yet another regional trophy – the second in three months. The national Under-20 side joined Banyana Banyana as the Cosafa champions after beating Lesotho here yesterday. Banyana won the Cosafa Women’s tournament in Zimbabwe in September. Bafana Bafana lost out on this year’s trophy after failing to defend their title in July on home soil. Amajita’s victory over the neighbours was a foregone conclusion – it was just a matter of how many goals were going to be scored. Before yesterday’s final, Amajita had twice beaten Lesotho in two recent friendlies in front of their home supporters in Maseru – 5-0 and 1-0 – and it was expected that they would continue to dominate. However, they made an easy job look hard by allowing Lesotho to come back in the second half when they should have wrapped it up in the opening half. It was a game of two halves, with Lesotho dominating the second half after a below-par performance in the opening stanza. South Africa started brightly as they found the back of the net as early as the third minute when Lyle Foster put Amajita ahead with an easy goal that unsettled and rattled the young Likoena early on. The young Orlando Pirates striker was eager to impress after missing the semifinal game against Egypt through injury. He did not look too happy when he was later withdrawn and his substitution changed the balance of the game to Lesotho, who were attacking relentlessly. After the opening goal, Lesotho suffered a blow when goalkeeper Monaheng Ramalefane had to leave the field due to injury. However, the South Africans did not take advantage of the reserve goalkeeper, Kopano Silase, as he was hardly tested. Amajita increased their tally five minutes from the break thanks to right back Kamogelo Sambo. However, Amajita took their feet off the pedal in the second half as they thought the game was already in the bag and nearly paid the price. This allowed their neighbours to come back strongly in the second half and they nearly took the game to penalties. Substitute Rethabile Mokokoane caught goalkeeper Sanele Tshabalala napping with a long free kick in the 59th minute. Mokokoane spotted Tshabalala off his line and his direct hit found the back of the net. The goal seemed to inspire Lesotho as they played much better after it. This caused all sorts of problems for the South Africans, who were rattled and on the back foot. A motivated Lesotho looked dangerous as they pushed hard for the equaliser and threw more bodies forward, but they could not find the all-important goal. It was a nervy time for Amajita, who hung on and had to dig deep to secure their second title in three years. In the end, they walked away with the title to end the year on a high for the SA Football Association. Amajita’s Luvuyo Mkatshana was named player of the tournament after inspiring the team to win the contest. Assistant coach Helman Mkhalele put national interest ahead of his own this week to contribute to this achievement. The former Jomo Cosmos and Bafana Bafana winger lost his mother on Tuesday, but stayed with the team until the final day. He will be back for the funeral on Wednesday. The 48-year-old said the loss of his mother was a difficult time for him and his family, but they understood his situation. “Fortunately, my family is understanding and I have been in contact with them throughout this difficult time,” said Mkhalele in Kitwe.  