The opposition parties in Gauteng have stepped up their campaigns against Premier David Makhura, with the Democratic Alliance organising a march and calling for his resignation and a motion of no confidence being put forward by the Economic Freedom Fighters.The ANC ruled against the vote, and called out the DA and EFF for &ldquo;political opportunism and grandstanding&rdquo;.The march was a bit of a damp squib &ndash; Makhura's office was focused on his awards ceremony in Midrand, where he handed out awards to people who had excelled in service delivery, later on Tuesday. But leaders of the Democratic Alliance were not deterred and called for Makhura&rsquo;s resignation as a result of the Life Esidimeni Health tragedy. DA Leader Mmusi Maimane, the party&rsquo;s Gauteng provincial leader John Moodey, DA Johannesburg regional chairperson Khume Ramulifho, DA chadow MEC of health Jack Bloom and Johannesburg mayor Herman Mashaba led the march to Makhura&rsquo;s office in Johannesburg.Maimane compared the tragedy to that of the Marikana massacre and the ongoing Nkandla saga. &ldquo;We saw them do this with Marikana. We saw them do this with Nkandla. We saw them do this with the Guptas&rsquo; Waterkloof landing. As soon as the scandal breaks, one person ends up under the bus and the rest walk away,&rdquo; Maimane said as he criticised the ANC-led government. The deaths of more than 100 would have been prevented had Makhura listened to the many warnings. - @MmusiMaimane #JusticeForEsidimeniThe DA leader called on Makhura to take responsibility for the Life Esidimeni tragedy, saying that he should follow former MEC Qedani Mahlangu&rsquo;s example and resign. &ldquo;All those responsible for these deaths must follow her example. And this begins with Premier David Makhura. Saying &lsquo;I don&rsquo;t know&rsquo; is simply not good enough. If you didn&rsquo;t know Premier, then you weren&rsquo;t doing your job,&rdquo; Maimane said. He went on to say that Makhura had been warned of the ongoing issues surrounding the Life Esidimeni patients, yet he did nothing to act on the matter. &ldquo;You were told as far back as November 2015, in the debate on the health annual report, of the grave dangers of moving these patients. And even after you were told of the first confirmed deaths, you did nothing. For 141 days you let Qedani Mahlangu remain in her post, as the death toll was rising,&rdquo; he said. The DA called for swifter action to take place, in order to find justice and closure for the families of the victims. These four steps include:1) The immediate resignation of Makhura,2) The establishment of a judicial commission of inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the deaths, 3) The South African Police Services must launch an inquest into each and every death, following the transfer of the Life Esidimeni patients,4) There must be full financial compensation provided to the families by the government. 1.Makhura must resign. 2.We want a Judicial Commission of Inquiry 3.SAPS must launch an inquest into each death #JusticeForEsidimeniOn February 20, at the state of the province address, Makhura denied knowing anything about the transfer of the Esidimeni patients into unlicensed non-governmental organisations. &ldquo;I would like to state categorically that the decision to transfer Life Esidimeni mental health patients to non-governmental organisations was not made in consultation with the provincial executive council,&rdquo; he had said. The DA was not the only party to have called for his resignation, after a motion of no confidence against the premier was put forward by the Economic Freedom Fighters during the third sitting of the provincial legislature. After an hour-long debate, the ANC ruled against it, cementing Makhura&rsquo;s place as the premier of Gauteng. ANC Chief Whip Brian Hlongwa said that the motion was a &ldquo;gimmick to undermine the process to deal with the tragic events of Life Esidimeni,&rdquo; and that Makhura was not cited for any involvement in the tragedy. &ldquo;We are appalled by the political opportunism and grandstanding displayed by the DA and EFF in such a serious matter. This political posturing by the anti-majoritarian forces of DA will not deter the ANC government led by Premier Makhura from implementing the recommendation of the health ombudsman and the remedial action,&rdquo; Hlongwa said.