Charges are piling up against an Eastern Cape woman who allegedly defrauded unsuspecting clients out of thousands of rands after she purported to be an advocate.A second case of harassment was filed on Monday by the same complainant, Tabisa Ralawe, against Luyanda Mqingwana. Ralawe had filed her first intimidation charge on Friday.&ldquo;I can confirm that I have laid two cases of intimidation as well as harassment against Luyanda Mqingwana but I cannot go to the merits or demerits of the case as the matter is subjudice,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Both matters relate to incidents that took place after an inquiry into her qualifications as an advocate broke out.&rdquo;Ralawe is also a lawyer in the Eastern Cape specialising in labour matters and investigations. She assisted in an official inquiry made against Mqingwana for allegedly parading herself as an advocate without qualifications.Mqingwana handed herself over to the King William&rsquo;s Town police station. King William&rsquo;s Town police spokesperson Captain Siphokazi Mawisa confirmed on Friday: &ldquo;The suspect (38) went to the police station today after the investigating officer visited her and could not find her. Police consulted the prosecutor and were advised to take a statement from the suspect and take the docket to court on Monday for [a] decision.&rdquo;However, prosecutors had not made a decision on the matter because of the new harassment case that was opened on Monday.When approached for a comment on Sunday following her visit to the police station, Mqingwana said: &ldquo;This is a nightmare. It always has been. This year I hope it will come to an end though.&rdquo;She denied handing herself over the police.&ldquo;As far as I understand, &lsquo;handing myself over&rsquo; and &lsquo;responding to a call&rsquo; are two different scenarios. I did not go over there to hand myself over for anything but to respond to a call by an investigator, unaware of the allegations levelled against me. &ldquo;The complainant is my neighbour Tabisa Ralo [Ralawe used Ralo in marriage, but reverted to her maiden name after divorce]. I did not get arrested because there are no grounds for that .... I feel I need to refrain from responding to any other allegations and inquiries conducted by yourself or anybody.&rdquo;She referred City Press to her lawyer, Vuyani Majebe. Mqingwana had not responded to an emailed question about the additional charge of intimidation at the time of writing.When approached for a comment on behalf of his clien on Sunday, Majebe explained the circumstances of the first case of intimidation saying: &ldquo;She never intimidated [the] complainant. In fact she never sent an SMS to the complainant at all. Ms Mqingwana fully cooperated with the police and gave a comprehensive statement refuting the unfounded allegations. We are confident the director of public prosecutions will, after reading the docket, decline to prosecute.&rdquo;The latest developments come amid an ongoing investigation by City Press after sources said that they were duped into paying thousands of rands by Mqingwana, who pretended to have the legal expertise to handle their cases.On her social network accounts Mqingwana claims to have an LLB from the University of Pretoria (UP), but this was dismissed by the university.Mqingwana did not provide City Press proof of her LLB from UP, but only provided two qualifications she claimed to have received.These were a certificate of child law from UP and a diploma in commercial law from Damelin.UP referred questions about the authenticity of the child law certificate to the South African Qualifications Authority. Damelin hasn&rsquo;t yet responded to questions.When approached to verify the authenticity of qualifications, the qualifications authority&rsquo;s chief executive, Joe Samuels, said permission was required from Mqingwana before verification could be processed.Mqingwana refused to give the newspaper the go-ahead to verify the authenticity of her qualifications.Sources told this newspaper that Mqingwana stated that she had an LLB from UP or University of Fort Hare.Fort Hare&rsquo;s acting spokesperson, Lizo Phiti, said that Mqingwana was enrolled at the University of Fort Hare from 2009 to 2012. &ldquo;She enrolled for a Bachelor of Laws degree in 2009 and according to her profile, she never completed her studies.&rdquo;After hearing that&nbsp;Mqingwana had told sources that she had a qualification from Fort Hare, Phiti said: &ldquo;That is false information because the University of Fort Hare never awarded any qualification to her.&rdquo;Phiti also confirmed that the unofficial academic records seen by City Press were correct. &ldquo;The appended academic record is a true reflection of what is in the student sub-system.&rdquo;