President Jacob Zuma will deliver his 10th state of the nation (Sona) address in Parliament this evening but ten years later, it seems very little has changed since Zuma&rsquo;s first address in 2009.Here are seven issues we expect Zuma&rsquo;s speech to cover:1. Unlike in June 2009, we are not in a recession, at least not in the true sense of the word, but our economy is barely growing and is shedding jobs instead of creating work.Zuma is expected to speak about how to stimulate economic growth and create jobs. After all, the government identified fighting poverty, inequality and unemployment as its priorities a few years ago.2. The minimum wage agreement of R3500 which was announced by Zuma&rsquo;s deputy Cyril Ramaphosa yesterday will certainly feature as an achievement in the president&rsquo;s speech. Government sources have claimed that the agreement was in fact signed before Sona and could not be delayed because it&rsquo;s one of those things Zuma wanted to highlight in his speech.3. The return of land to black people who were displaced by the apartheid regime tops the list of urgent tasks for the ANC. Land reform is also at the heart of the so-called radical socio-economic transformation agenda of the governing party. In the ANC&rsquo;s January 8 statement, Zuma said they would radically pursue land reform using the &ldquo;The Expropriation of Land Tenure Act&rdquo; &ndash; a law that does not exist. Hopefully, he will bring more clearer facts this time around.4. A social welfare crisis awaits more than 17 million social grant recipients as it remains unclear who will disburse the millions in payments from April 1. Functionaries told Parliament a week ago that they would approach the Constitutional Court requesting it to set aside its ruling which declared invalid the contract between government and Cash Paymaster Services which pays out the grants. Politicians have been decidedly quiet on the matter. The president ought to assure the millions who depend on government grants that there will be no interruptions.5. The Higher Education sector remains on tenterhooks and things could go either way. Higher education institutions, experts, opposition politicians and the #FeesMustFall movement feel the government can do more to ensure not only access, but affordable quality post-school education. While the Fees Commission continues with its work, it would be wise for the president to have some words on the issue.6. The deaths of 94 mentally ill patients in ill-resourced NGOs in Gauteng last year is possibly the lowest point of the democratically elected government. Some say Zuma should have called for a national day of mourning, but the announcement of a solid government plan on mental health and for mental health patients is what will assist the healing process. Zuma will probably mention the national health insurance, a proposed flagship ANC policy on health, which is going nowhere slowly. It&rsquo;s been in the pipeline for most of Zuma&rsquo;s stay in office.7. South Africa is facing a water crisis. The president needs to address the government&rsquo;s plan to deal with water shortages as a matter of national interest and a priority.