The refurbishment of South Africa&rsquo;s flagship military hospital in Pretoria has dragged on for 10 years so far due to flawed project management and planning, with costs mounting to an estimated total of more than R1 billion.One of the most glaring shortcomings was that when Project 1 Military Hospital was managed by the of public works department, the focus was solely on building structure, with total costs estimated at R387.4 million. No provision was made for essential medical equipment, which is estimated to cost more than R659.6 million.General Mogoruti Ledwaba, commanding officer of defence works formation in the department of defence, revealed details of inadequacies during a presentation to the portfolio committee in Parliament on Wednesday.His department assumed responsibility for the management of the project &ndash; which focuses primarily on upgrades to the antiquated first floor &ndash; in 2014. The first floor is currently not operational and resembles a construction site. The defence department had assumed responsibility as public works &ldquo;lacked capacity and was overwhelmed&rdquo;, Ledwaba told Media24 after the briefing.&ldquo;It is broken, yes, but we are fixing it, and we are comfortable about where we are going. We have fast-tracked the project and the integrated approach is working.&rdquo;During the presentation, Ledwaba also revealed a surge in costs for medical outsourcing due to the unavailability of services on the first floor. Payments amounted to R98.2 million last year compared with R45.9 million in the 2010-2011 financial year. Services that were outsourced included radiography, blood services, nursing and laboratory services.But this figure excluded costs for repair and maintenance on electrical, mechanical and electronic systems and also lifts and general maintenance, which had also been outsourced. Public works had failed to pay contractors, resulting in the shutting down of services such as boilers and air conditioners, said Ledwaba.The defence department intervened to ensure payments were prompt, and in January relieved public works of the responsibility of maintaining equipment.Other defects in public works&rsquo; plans were that the old pharmacy would have been retained, yet it did not comply with legislation.The &ldquo;old school&rdquo; hospital, which was built in 1977, needed to be overhauled to cater for best medical practices and developments. When the revised project is complete, the first floor will have 13 theatres, a new pharmacy and histology laboratory.The project began in 2006 and is now expected to be completed only in 2020.At the briefing, DA MP Kobus Marais said it appeared that public works had cost the government millions for doing a &ldquo;poor, haphazard job&rdquo;, and he asked how it was possible to overlook the provision of medical equipment. He questioned whether Ledwaba&rsquo;s unit was able to turn around the project. &ldquo;Every time we visit the hospital we see the same situation. The only progress made is knocking down of walls, but service delivery is poorer,&rdquo; he said.DA MP Shahid Esau raised concerns that the hospital would need to continue outsourcing fundamental services for the next three years. &ldquo;There is a threat of the hospital being a white elephant, with poor design and poor planning 10 years later.&rdquo;ANC MP James &ldquo;JJ&rdquo; Skosana pointed out that while there had been problems, Ledwaba&rsquo;s unit had shifted things and the project was now back on track.Problems at the hospital have been reported previously. In October 2013, patients in most wards of 1 Military hospital had to use their cellphones to call nurses when they needed help because the emergency call system had been out of order for two years, according to reports. News24 reported that a few years earlier, the hospital had to be shut down because of defects in its fire safety system.