If the ANC proceeds with plans to have Brian Molefe sworn in as an MP they &ldquo;must know they will have to bring him to convince North West voters why they must vote for the ANC&rdquo;.This was said by an ANC alliance partner, the South African National Civic Organisation in the North West, who threatened to drag its feet when it came to the 2019 national government elections when it would be expected to campaign for the governing party.Sanco joined the choir of those opposed to the elevation of Molefe to Parliament just three months after his resignation as chief executive of Eskom in the wake of former Public Protector Thuli Madonsela&rsquo;s damning &ldquo;State of Capture&rdquo; report, which linked him to the controversial, wealthy and politically connected Gupta family. &ldquo;Sanco in the province is shocked by the elevation of Brian Molefe to an ANC MP as this undermines the values of the alliance in the North West province. It is our strongest view that his elevation will divide the ANC even more. It is a clear manipulation of democratic process of the ANC branches because the very same branch Ward 29 Madibeng, where the ANC provincial executive committee claims he comes from, is denying that,&rdquo; Sanco provincial secretary Packet Seaketso said. &ldquo;Molefe has never appeared or nominated by any branch of the ANC during the list process and therefore he was snuck in through the back door against all loyal members who were able to abide by ANC list processes. &ldquo;We then have to question his credentials. That matter has never been discussed in the deployment committee of the ANC in the province which I am part of.&rdquo;Seaketso said Molefe&rsquo;s appointment to Parliament was &ldquo;a middle finger to the North West voters&rdquo;.&ldquo;This tendency is going to make it difficult for the ANC to convince us as Sanco to mobilise voters in 2019. If they proceed with this, they must know they will have to bring Molefe to the North West voters to convince them why they must vote for the ANC.&rdquo;Meanwhile, there have also been reports of Molefe being eyed to replace Pravin Gordhan for the finance minister position or a deputy in the same department elsewhere. It has been speculated that Molefe&rsquo;s name suddenly appearing on the North West ANC members of Parliament list was the first step towards an even bigger position in government.The ANC in the North West has been sent into a public relation frenzy and the party has been making headlines since the weekend, defending its decision to have Molefe&rsquo;s name on its MPs list.Plans to have him sworn in as MP were met with opposition by many, including some of Premier Supra Mahumapelo&rsquo;s well-known detractors and those who believed this was happening because he was President Jacob Zuma&rsquo;s man. Molefe faced no formal charges as a result of the &ldquo;State of Capture&rdquo; report.Mahumapelo was quoted by the SABC as saying on Sunday: &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want to find people guilty when they&rsquo;ve not gone through the due process of the law in the country. Here in South Africa you can be accused of something and you&rsquo;re guilty already [and] you can&rsquo;t be appointed anywhere, you must stay home; it&rsquo;s very unfortunate, I must say. Comrade Brian remains as innocent as you and me as far as the State of Capture report is concerned.&rdquo;The party in the province said Molefe was a valuable asset to the province. &ldquo;Many people know Comrade Brian as a former Eskom chief executive but we in the ANC and in particular the ANC in North West, know him as a fellow hardworking comrade who&rsquo;s committed to contributing to the success of this democracy. His credentials are unquestionable. Comrade Brian is known for performing exceptionally well in all the positions he has occupied and no one can genuinely question his abilities,&rdquo; said ANC provincial secretary Dakota Legoete.&ldquo;The ANC has in many of its congresses stressed the importance of attracting and retaining crucial skills necessary for supporting our democracy and helping us achieve the national democratic revolution through the national development plan that our government has adopted. It would not make sense to lose the skills and expertise that someone like Comrade Brian possess. &ldquo;&ldquo;We in the ANC Bokone Bophirima have faith in Comrade Brian and believe that, once sworn in as MP, he will make a huge contribution to Parliament.&rdquo; The ANC Ward 29 branch chairperson Bethuel Mmutle said they would call a press conference on Tuesday to &ldquo;set the record straight on the misleading information that has been spread by some who claim to be the leadership of our branch when they&rsquo;re not&rdquo;.The branch was expected to speak on conflicting statements on whether Molefe was Ward 29 branch member or not.