Parliament has downplayed concerns that stepped-up security measures could impede freedom of movement and coverage when the president delivers his state of the nation address next week.However, Parliament&rsquo;s secretary Gengezi Mgidlana also cautioned that the institution was not responsible for security outside Parliament&rsquo;s gates, and on the precinct, security arrangements were a shared responsibility with units that included the State Security Agency and South African Police Service.At a briefing to update media about arrangements for President Jacob Zuma&rsquo;s address next Thursday evening, Mgidlana said he was not in a position to comment on speculation that up to 6000 extra SAPS members would be deployed around Parliament on the day of the address.He could also not confirm whether the no-go zone outside Parliament had been extended, saying this was outside Parliament&rsquo;s authority.Mgidlana said that the State Security Agency, like other units, had &ldquo;specific responsibilities&rdquo; and would run their own processes via the National Joint Operational and Intelligence Structure, which includes the police, intelligence and the army.&ldquo;From our perspective, state of the nation address is not about security, it is about a day for the president to deliver his state of the nation address. It is about members of the public interacting with that process.&rdquo;Although there was &ldquo;unprecedented&rdquo; interest from the media this year, with 70 houses representing 713 journalists applying for accreditation, they would have freedom of movement.&ldquo;In terms of journalists doing business, this will not be inhibited and is guaranteed in the constitution.&rdquo;Mgidlana also said that following a court ruling, Parliament would not cut the live TV feed in the event of a disturbance in the house again. &ldquo;We will respect the judgment. I don&rsquo;t think there will be an interruption of footage or a blackout. We are ready to provide feed and footage as normal. We are in the business of showing the proceedings of the house.&rdquo; He confirmed that members of the State Security Agency &ndash; which was responsible for the infamous signal-jamming incident during state of the nation address two years ago &ndash; were already on the precinct. However, he rejected reports of securitisation of Parliament. &ldquo;This idea is false, and doesn&rsquo;t have any foundation.&rdquo;Over the past two years, security has been stepped up at Parliament. A group of former South African Police Service &ldquo;bouncers&rdquo; have been employed to remove MPs who disrupt proceedings on the National Assembly floor. The rule book has been tightened up to target unruly MPs &ndash; in particular members of the Economic Freedom Fighters.The EFF&rsquo;s Julius Malema has already &ldquo;promised action&rdquo; at state of the nation address. Then this week the party sent a letter to the speaker calling for Zuma to not deliver his address. Instead, the EFF has demanded that Parliament debate its failure to hold the president to account.At the briefing, Mgidlana also announced that this year&rsquo;s austerity measures included cutting out the dinner, and reducing the budget by R500 000 to R4 million.The traditional pomp and ceremony and red-carpet parade was scheduled on the precinct beforehand, and the mbongi this year will be siSwati.