R41 million &ndash; that&rsquo;s how much the North West health department has racked up in gross-negligent hospital payouts between 2011 and 2015.The amount of cases also doubled &ndash; from 27 cases in 2011-2012 up to 53 for the 2014-2015 period. These numbers, which were supplied by North West provincial health spokesperson Tebogo Lekgethwane, have been attributed to staff shortages and budget shortfalls. One such case occurred in January 2013, when Johannes Geldenhuys (38), of Klerksdorp, was admitted into Tshepong Hospital for a laceration to his right arm as a result of knocking over a glass aquarium. A few days later, he was transferred to Chris Hani Baragwanath hospital, where his arm had to eventually be amputated. Geldenhuys was a cabinet maker prior to his accident and relied on his hands to bring in an income for his family. This week the North Gauteng High Court ruled in favour of Geldenhuys, after the legal team representing the North West health MEC conceded that gross negligence of the doctors and nurses at the hospital had been directly responsible for the loss of his arm. Sunelle van Heerden, marketing manager for Christopher Consulting who funded the forensic investigation and who appointed the legal team, said it was evident from the absence of nursing monitoring notes between 5pm on January 1 to 9.30am on January 4 that no monitoring took place. &ldquo;This patient suffered a major trauma and went through hours of surgery only to be dumped in a ward with no further monitoring taking place,&rdquo; Van Heerden said. Lekgethwane told City Press that the department believed that the hospital did everything reasonable to save Geldenhuys&rsquo;s arm. &ldquo;However, now that the court has ruled against the department, the department accepted the outcome and the matter will be looked into internally,&rdquo; he said.The trauma of losing a limb has had far-reaching consequences for the Geldenhuyses, who have four daughters aged between six and 11. &ldquo;My husband used to be extremely social and now he doesn&rsquo;t like to go anywhere. He was right-handed and has had to &lsquo;relearn&rsquo; everything,&rdquo; Chantel Geldenhuys said. &ldquo;At the time my husband was the sole provider and I only have a part-time job. Yes we will be getting money from the department of health but that is only financial relief. It will never restore my husband back to what he was,&rdquo; Chantel said. She questioned why it had to take people to lose their limbs or lives in order for the health department to realise that there was something wrong with the healthcare system in the country. &ldquo;It just doesn&rsquo;t make sense. All the money that the department has to pay to families could be used in other ways to do so much of good,&rdquo; she said.Johannes said that it was the saddest day in his life when he realised he would never again be able to do the job that he had loved. &ldquo;I always went the extra mile when I worked with my tools to make sure that I did not injure myself because this is an occupational hazard in my trade. To think that a stupid accident like this compounded by the gross negligence of nurses and doctors at the hospital cut short my career is almost unthinkable,&rdquo; Johannes said. Christopher Consulting will be claiming for a prosthetic arm as well compensation for his loss of earnings. &ldquo;The prosthetic arm we are claiming for alone will cost about R1.7 million while five-yearly refurbishment will push the total cost up to R3.5 million. Because he will never again be able to ply his trade as an expert cabinet maker, his loss of earnings over his expected lifetime will run into several million more,&rdquo; Van Heerden said. Lekgethwane told City Press that the department had conducted internal investigations into cases of negligence and found that staff shortages of doctors and nurses were a particular problem, especially in rural areas. &ldquo;In clinics there is often only one professional nurse to deal with all types of patients, as a result sometimes neglecting emergencies. Shortage of health professionals is a national problem. The province continues to do everything possible to increase the intake of new students to be trained as doctors and nurses ... but budget shortfalls also have a bearing on the intake,&rdquo; Lekgethwane said. He said that the department had not yet concluded an internal review into the health professionals who were assigned to Geldenhuys while he was at Tshepong hospital. &ldquo;All cases are reviewed and investigated internally by the patient safety group and this case will be no exception,&rdquo; he said.