Last year&rsquo;s breathtaking season of The Voice SA saw reputable Universal Records sign not only the winner of the competition, but nine other contestants who were just too good to let go.Among the contestants, mainly because of her compelling background and powerhouse voice, was former corporate worker Thembeka Mnguni with a dream to be a singer.Mnguni is working on her album set to be released mid-year. However, she is not yet ready to reveal details about the songs, the genre or even the theme of the album. She only discloses that she plans to dedicate her time to the studio whenever her schedule allows her to produce more music for her fans. &ldquo;I have been expressing my art all over the country. I&rsquo;ve been so busy that I barely have time to spend with my son, that is still unusual for me,&rdquo; she said.&nbsp; The singer is currently prepping for another musical journey as she will be starring as a diva in an on-stage adult musical called Priscilla Queen of The Desert, set to commence next month with an all-South African cast.She will also be performing at the Starlight Classics concert in Cape Town from March 3 to 4 alongside pianist Charl du Plessis and the vibrant Mzansi Youth Choir, just to name a few.The 33-year-old credits her participation in The Voice for a &ldquo;better life&rdquo;. She and her autistic five-year-old son, Sabelo, now live in Durban. Asked whether she has regrets over her demanding career, Mnguni said:&ldquo;Absolutely not. I have an autistic son who needs to attend a private institution. I am now able to pay for his school fees, something I couldn&rsquo;t do last year." Mnguni&rsquo;s future plans include hosting her own TV show and incorporating all the veterans she looked up to as a little girl. She also has plans of having her own trust fund aimed at bettering the lives of children with autism. &ldquo;Those who want to prosper should listen to the coaches, take notes and suck in the knowledge they receive because the coaches know what they are doing,&rdquo; she said.