The environmental affairs department has disputed claims made by waste management giant EnviroServ that it had found the source of the noxious odours at its hazardous waste landfill in Shongweni, KwaZulu-Natal.Communities near the landfill on the outskirts of eThekwini Metro have been fighting the government and searching for answers behind a range of health problems suffered by families in the neighbourhood.Residents from Hillcrest, Shongweni, Assagay, Dassenhoek and kwaNdengezi told City Press that the lack of response from the provincial environment department pushed them to seek legal recourse in the form of a class action.They believe that toxic emissions from EnviroServ&rsquo;s Shongweni landfill were behind high rates of people suffering from asthma, bronchitis, nosebleeds and severe allergic reactions among residents.READ:&nbsp;Asthma, bronchitis, nosebleeds &ndash; residents say dump is making them sick The department&rsquo;s deputy director-general for chemicals and waste management, Mark Gordon, told City Press on Wednesday: &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t believe [EnviroServ&rsquo;s] story. Right now, they can be saying all kinds of things. We do not believe this is the case at all. We don&rsquo;t believe their story. It&rsquo;s a technical or biochemical problem that has been manifesting now after a long period of time,&rdquo; he said.On Tuesday, the company&rsquo;s coastal operations manager, Clive Kidd, told media on a site visit that the bacteria Desulfovibrio vulgaris contributed to the stench, and that because of a drop in pH level &ndash; sanctioned through regulation changes by the department &ndash; the bacteria had been able to thrive.&ldquo;The previous regulations allowed for pH-9 and above. The new regulations [since 2013] were pH-6 and above. So overall, the pH of the waste dropped,&rdquo; The Mercury reported Kidd saying. The site was being doused with lime on a daily basis and there were signs of improvement, according to Kidd. But the residents that City Press spoke to denied any improvements, with all contending that the stench, and illnesses they believe are as a direct result of the site, had worsened. Last week, the department issued the company with a notice of intention to suspend or revoke the licence for the landfill because of increased public complaints, despite measures taken by EnviroServ. The company had until Thursday to submit reasons as to why the site&rsquo;s licence should not be suspended or revoked. Gordon said that the fact that the department had executed a search-and-seizure warrant at the Shongweni premises and opened a criminal investigation was evidence of its confidence in its analysis of the situation.&ldquo;For us to go that far shows that we are being straight about what we believe is the problem. EnviroServ can be making all kinds of submissions; we will have to evaluate that. It has taken a long time &ndash; since August last year &ndash; since I first issued the 11-point plan to where we are now in terms of observations about what has happened. We will have to look at what evidence they are submitting,&rdquo; he said.The site was, among other things, suspended from receiving Type 1 waste (extremely hazardous) via the 11-point-plan and then a compliance notice last year, but can still accept other hazardous waste types.Once EnviroServ responded to the department, Gordon said, he would decide on a course of action. Responding to Gordon&rsquo;s comments, EnviroServ chief executive Dean Thompson told City Press: &ldquo;[A] review of waste streams, leachate data and landfill gas emission data at the site, show that the technical problem relates to the change from minimum requirements to the waste regulations over a three-year period. These changes have inherently created a pH environment promoting excessive growth of sulphur reducing bacteria in the landfill, producing hydrogen sulphide as an odorous emission.&rdquo;He said that the department instructed EnviroServ last year in its compliance notice to &ldquo;revert to treatment as dictated by the previous waste regulations, i.e treating incoming waste to a pH of 9&rdquo;.&ldquo;EnviroServ has always maintained we are contributing to odours being experienced in the area however our independent air emission specialists have confirmed that Shongweni cannot be the only contributor,&rdquo; he said.In fact, EnviroServ maintained for months that the malodour was not emanating from the landfill, but in September last year, finally admitted publicly it was a &ldquo;contributor&rdquo; to the stench. However, it staunchly denied any culpability for the health issues allegedly related to the odour and insisted that other industries in the area be investigated. Asked if the company acknowledged that the malodour was causing health problems in the community, Thompson told City Press: &ldquo;All data currently available indicates emission levels measured at the fence line of the Shongweni landfill site are below the health risk thresholds published by the World Health Organisation.&rdquo;The notice to suspend or revoke the site&rsquo;s licence came a day before residents from the affected communities took to the streets in a &ldquo;Toxic Trek&rdquo; on Saturday. Police confirmed that close on 2000 residents marched through the streets of Hillcrest, demanding the company respect their rights to breathe clean air.The company has repeatedly refused to release an inventory of waste accepted at the site to the media or the Upper Highway Air non profit organisation. According to Upper Highway Air, 11 748 complaints relating to the malodour and ill health were submitted to the relevant authorities in January.