The latest Kaizer Chiefs signing of Venezuelan international Gustavo Paez on Premier Soccer League (PSL) transfer deadline day continues to cement what team manager Bobby Motaung once said: that they don’t sign “wow” players. Chiefs signed the 26-year-old Gustavo Paez on January 31 2017 after he spent several weeks trying to impress head coach Steve Komphela and his technical team. The Naturena-based team have been heavily criticised by their supporters for failing to sign some of the best players available, recently missing out on Sibusiso Vilakazi and Thapelo Morena – all going to one of their main rivals, Mamelodi Sundowns. Here are five strikers Amakhosi signed on free transfer and their contribution to the team. 1. Shaun Bartlett. In 2006, when Bartlett one of the most successful South African football exports, joined the Glamour Boys, a lot of the club’s fans were joyous and the opposition supporters were bitter on how their teams had missed out. Little did they know that he would become an average player. Bartlett was signed from the Barclays Premier League’s team Charlton Athletic after having a successful career abroad. He scored 26 times for Athletic before coming to Chiefs where he scored just 12 goals in 44 appearances. Four of those goals came in his last season during his two-year stay. His goal record is 27% 2. Siphelele Mthembu Mthembu joined Kaizer Chiefs on free transfer from Platinum Stars in 2014. He had been given a chance to prove himself after he failed to live up to expectations at Orlando Pirates when they won him through legal battles from Chiefs. Earlier in his career, he reportedly signed a deal to join the Amakhosi; however, his representative was already said to have a struck a deal for him to go to Pirates.  Given his bad performances in the past, Shaka Zulu, as he affectionately known, has this season not managed to play in one PSL match. He managed to feature in two games in the Telkom Knockout, but hasn’t scored a goal. In 2015/16, he scored one goal in 20 games in all competitions. Goal record: 6.8% 3. Camaldine Abraw The 26-year-old striker joined Kaizer Chiefs on free transfer from Free State Stars. He scored just four goals in 20 league games in the 2015/16 season. In 2015, the strong striker injured himself while on international duty with the Togolese national team. As a result, he hasn’t kicked a ball this season. Goal record: 20% 4. Bernard Parker Parker is one of the most successful players at Chiefs, having won a league both abroad and locally. The former Bafana Bafana star has scored more goals on this list. Since he joined the Glamour Boys he has also won the leading goal-scorer awards for both club and PSL.  Goal record: 25% 5. Gustavo Paez It remains to be been seen how much the Venezuelan will contribute to Amakhosi this season as the drought of goals continues.