President Jacob Zuma managed to deliver his state of the nation address on Thursday night despite a number of interruptions. Here are 12 of the promises he made for the remaining two years of his administration. 1. He paid homage to former ANC president, Oliver Tambo, who would have turned 100 in 2017, which was declared &ldquo;the year of unity in action by all South Africans&rdquo;. Maths and science will be prioritised because he taught those subjects.2. The global economic environment remains uncertain, but the economy is recovering. It needs to grow faster to create the jobs we need for the youth. There will be continuing focus on the previously mooted nine-point plan to reignite growth, focusing on industrialisation, mining, beneficiation, agriculture, agro-processing, energy, small businesses, managing work place conflict, attracting investments, growing the oceans economy and tourism.3. He expressed condolences to the families of the 94 psychiatric patients who died in a Gauteng treatment centre, without mentioning the number of patients who died. Zuma has instructed the ministry of health to ensure that health ombudsman&rsquo;s recommendations are implemented.4. Radical socioeconomic transformation should move &ldquo;beyond words, to practical programmes&rdquo;. Zuma defined it as &ldquo;fundamental change in the structure, systems, institutions and patterns of ownership, management and control of the economy in favour of all South Africans, especially the poor, the majority of whom are African and female, as defined by the governing party which makes policy for the democratic government&rdquo;. This includes using the state&rsquo;s R500 billion annual budget to procure things from black businesses.5. Delays and backlogs in registration and issuing of title deeds to beneficiaries of housing projects will be sped up. 6. The lowering of data costs &ldquo;is uppermost in our policies and plans&rdquo;.7. The Mining Charter is being reviewed with the aim of recognising the state&rsquo;s right to exercise sovereignty over mineral and petroleum resources in the republic, and to deracialise the ownership of the mining industry.8. The government will implement a commercialisation support programme for 450 black smallholder farmers and wants more women to consider farming. 9. &ldquo;Caring government responded appropriately by taking over the responsibility to pay the fee increase for the 2016 academic year&rdquo; and settled debt owed by National Student Financial Aid Scheme students. The government has provided funds to ensure that no student whose combined family income is up to R600 000 will face fee increases at universities and colleges for 2017.10. Visible policing will be increased and specialised capabilities will assist in problematic high-crime areas. Specialised units focusing on drug-related crime, taxi violence and firearms and the enhanced utilisation of investigative aids such as forensic leads will be used.11. South Africa will be chairing the Southern African Development Community (SADC) from August and will use this tenure to fast-track the implementation of the SADC industrial strategy and the implementation of the SADC-Comesa-East African Community free trade area.12. Trade with partners in the West and the Brics (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) will continue. China in particular was mentioned, with the emphasis on the People&rsquo;s Republic of China as the sole authority recognised by South Africa.