Today Gauteng Premier David Makhura delivered his mid-term state of the province address at the Green Hills Stadium, Rand-West City. Makhura, who has been the premier since 2014, outlined key issues which have been leading the dialogue between government and community and spoke of what the provincial office has done and what it plans to tackle. Here are 10 key topics that he addressed:1) The Life Esidimeni tragedy. Makhura said that the decision to transfer the psychiatric patients to the non-governmental organisations was done without the consultation of the provincial executive council and that he was committed towards restoring justice. &ldquo;I will spend the remainder of my term over the next two years, to ensure that there is restorative justice and healing for the families and take every executive action possible to restore confidence in our public health system,&rdquo; he said. 2) The address was held in the West Rand, which has moved from the number-two region in 2015 to taking first place in the 2016 Grade 12 examinations.&ldquo;This is a sign that things are changing in this region and the future can only be bright, with good educational outcomes,&rdquo; Makhura said. 3) Progress on infrastructure development within the West Rand was outlined. Makhura spoke about the upgrading of the N14 highway and the revitalisation of industrial parks in Khutsong, Mohlakeng and Chamdor. &ldquo;I am pleased to report that a lot of progress is being made in this region through partnerships between the provincial government, municipalities and the private sector.&rdquo;4) Makhura spoke of economic transformation and the growth of the jobs sector, saying that Gauteng has recorded the largest &ldquo;nett gain in new jobs since the 2008 global financial crisis&rdquo;. More than 700 000 jobs were created between the 2010-2016 period, but confessed that this growth does not appease unemployment levels. 5) According to Makhura, Gauteng is the number one destination for foreign tourists in the country (41.4%), and a focus on increasing trade with other major economies was highlighted. &ldquo;We are focusing on increasing trade and investment flows with major economies in Africa, Asia-Pacific, Europe and the Americas.&rdquo;6) The budget on the township economy has increased from R600 million in 2014 to R6 billion in 2016. &ldquo;This represents 22% of the 30% target we have set for 2019.&rdquo;7) The infrastructural budget of R42 billion over the next three years will address the empowerment of black firms. &ldquo;Our infrastructure investment must support the priority economic sectors and help to redress spatial imbalances in the five corridors to spread the benefits of re-industrialisation, employment and empowerment equitably across Gauteng.&rdquo;8) Makhura called to fast-track the roll-out of infrastructural projects such as the mega human settlements project and water and sanitation. &ldquo;Over the next two years, let us work together to fast-track the roll-out of infrastructure projects that have been long underway with regard to planning and implementation.&rdquo;9) Makhura spoke of the need to uplift and alleviate youth unemployment in the province via a flagship programme called Tshepo 500 000, which was introduced in 2014, with the aim of creating opportunities for young people to enter the labour market and access skills and entrepreneurial development. &ldquo;Over the past two years, we have touched the lives of more than 350 000 young people who have benefited from the four pillars of this programme &hellip; The major lesson we learnt since the launch of Tshepo 500 000 in December 2014, is that to deal with the chronic global problem of youth unemployment successfully, we must embark on unconventional approaches and build sector-specific partnerships.&rdquo; 10) The investment towards quality public education was also a big topic of discussion, with Makhura saying that Gauteng townships are becoming &ldquo;centres of academic and educational excellence and redress.&rdquo; Schools that have performed below 40%, from 14 in 2014 to 2 in 2016, have been reduced and township schools have increased the most in matric passes for 2016. &ldquo;A more independent indicator of the improvements is the fact that Gauteng performed better than all other provinces and some countries on the continent in maths and science in the recent Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study.&rdquo;