Aware that the tragedy of the deaths of 94 people after the Life Esidimeni transfer saga might define his term, Gauteng premier David Makhura used his state of the province address to extend a hand to their families and to distance his government from what took place. After greetings, Makhura immediately launched his speech on Monday by vowing that he would spend the remainder of his term ensuring that there was restorative justice and healing for the families. He also promised to take every possible executive action to restore confidence in the public health system. Makhura fired former health MEC Qedani Mahlangu after the health ombudsman revealed that more than 94 psychiatric patients died after they were removed from the Life Esidimeni centre where they were being cared for, to private non-governmental organisations, most of which did not meet the requirements to offer such care. &ldquo;As the premier of this province, I have stated my deep regret and profuse apology for the tragic death of so many of our vulnerable citizens who were under the care of the Gauteng health department.&rdquo;Makhura threw Mahlangu under the bus when he distanced the government from her decision to transfer the patients. &ldquo;I would like to state categorically that the decision to transfer Life Esidimeni mental health patients to non-governmental organisations was not made in consultation with the provincial executive council. &ldquo;The executive council and I would have never approved a plan to outsource mental health, a primary responsibility of the state to care for the vulnerable in our society, to non-governmental organisations.&ldquo;What is even worse is the fact that such organisations didn&rsquo;t meet appropriate standards and legal prescripts.&rdquo;Democratic Alliance Gauteng health spokesperson Jack Bloom, who helped keep pressure on Mahlangu on the issue, said he did not believe Makhura when he pleaded ignorance about what the health department was doing. &ldquo;At least he was clearly contrite. But there is no way he was not aware. There were two legal cases filed on the matter and he [Makhura] was a respondent. How could he not know?&rdquo; asked Bloom.The DA brought small flags bearing the words &ldquo;Remember Esidimeni 94&rdquo; to the Gauteng Legislature sitting in Randfontein on the West Rand.They also carried posters with the words &ldquo;Makhura must fall&rdquo;.Police kept Economic Freedom Fighters members who wanted to protest on the same issue far from the venue. Part of the reasons for removing patients was that it was expensive &ndash; it was costing the provincial government R320 million a year. Makhura emphasised that cost considerations could never override the imperative of the quality of care. &ldquo;I have always emphasised to MECs and heads of departments reviewing contracts with any service provider to never compromise service delivery, especially to the most vulnerable groups that depend entirely on the state for their well-being,&rdquo; Makhura said.He added that he was deeply aggrieved by how those responsible for the tragedy had tried to hide the facts from him.He promised that the new health MEC would take swift action to implement the recommendations of the health ombudsman. As a result of the Life Esidimeni experience, the premier said he was instituting a wide-ranging inspection and conditional assessment of all centres that care for the most vulnerable, notably the elderly and people with disabilities. But opposition parties still want Makhura to also be held liable for the tragedy. He will have his hands full deflecting those calls. Other key features of the speech included:&raquo; Since the start of his administration, biannual employment has reached 317 000 jobs, breaking the previous ceiling of 300 000 jobs. But he added that he was aware in order to significantly decrease unemployment, the figures needed to be doubled; &raquo; The provincial government had increased its spending on the township economy from R600 million in 2014 to R6 billion in 2016; and&raquo; The provincial government had reached a point where 91% of the procurement budget of R46 billion over the medium 3 period was directed to empower black people, women, youth and people with disabilities.