Having heard from different quarters – from the media fraternity and within the African National Congress, I began to believe it as a genuine story. It’s 2007 at the University of Limpopo in Polokwane, and it is a few hours before the party delegates elect members of the National Executive Committee (NEC). The Jacob Zuma camp is in a sublime mood after an overwhelming win over the Thabo Mbeki camp for the top six positions – but there is something they are uncertain about. Should they back Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma (who was in the Mbeki Camp) to be in the NEC of the party? It is said that one of the delegates went to check with the newly-elected party president (Zuma) who simply responded: “Go tell the comrades that, sisabonana nomama – (we’re still seeing each other).” Recent media reports suggest that Dlamini-Zuma still has a house in the Zuma homestead despite divorcing for more than a decade. It seems like the duo only divorced on paper. And media reports suggest that Dlamini-Zuma is touted to lead the party by those in the Zuma camp. Going against the deputy president Cyril Ramaphosa she is not going to have it easy. Cosatu on the other hand has publicly endorsed the “Buffalo soldier” – who is loved by many in the business circles, saying tradition has it that the deputy ultimately becomes the president. But is it the constitution of the party? The question remains, can it withstand those who back the former outgoing African Union Commission Chairperson? The two front runners have impressive résumés when it comes to political leadership. Ramaphosa played a huge role as the secretary-general of the ANC and drafting of the Constitution of a democratic South Africa. He did well for himself as a businessperson. Is the party ready to be led by Ramaphosa? On the other hand, Dlamini-Zuma championed the fight against cancer – pushing for stringent tobacco laws as the minister of health. She forged partnerships with different countries as minister of Home Affairs and Foreign Affairs respectively. But is that enough? A million dollar question is about uniting the ANC after the party’s elective conference in December and restoring the confidence of the party’s supporters. The known fact is that the oldest party suffered a major blow in the local government elections in August last year. The funny thing though about the race is that some feminists find themselves in a dilemma not knowing whether to support Dlamini-Zuma or Ramaphosa. What seems to be a problem is the name attached to Dlamini-Zuma. Are we Zum-ing in again? But also what seems to be a problem for Ramaphosa is his “involvement” in the Marikana massacre. The irony, however, is that the organisation that represents most workers in the country supports him despite his “involvement” as a shareholder to refuse workers a wage of R12 500 supported by the Braamfontein-based federation. Withstanding this, one doubts that the anti-Ramaphosa camp is feminists. One thinks that it’s just a campaign to make sure that Ramaphosa does not become the president. Whereas the anti-Dlamini-Zuma camp insinuates that those who are close to Jacob Zuma are thieving politicians who are captured. It is yet to be seen as to who has the trump card between the two front runners. Mud-slinging and grandstanding in an important political calendar year like this has become the order of the day. But can they have one vision after the elective conference? The current party president’s famous prayer is that Dlamini-Zuma wins so that his position is safe because of “basabonana nomama”. For the sake of the ANC, unity is of utmost importance after a decade – from Polokwane to Fokol-wane. There is fokol service delivery, fokol interest in education, fokol interest in the economy and rural developments after so many hopes – as the “people’s president” was elected and the “aloof” one recalled. The needs of the people should top the agenda of every politician and the need to be selfless as opposed to self-centred be the order of the day. »   Gumede is a socio-political commentator and a journalism lecturer at Rosebank College. He writes in his personal capacity Fokol means absolutely nothing 