It’s just eight days to go before the opening, and Noxolo Dlamini is still pinching herself. The 23-year-old still can’t believe she’s landed the role of a lifetime, taking over a role created by Leleti Khumalo before she was even born. This is the second major revival of Mbongeni Ngema’s classic anti-apartheid musical, Sarafina! and will no doubt fill auditoriums once again, just as it did 31 years ago and again in 2004. “It still has relevance, because there are always young black and white children learning about the history of their country and what Sarafina! shows is a very integral part of our history, the student uprising, the rejection of Afrikaans as a medium of learning,” says Dlamini. “It is also a reminder of where the black youth of South Africa has come from, inspiring the current youth to stand up for what they need and want.” And how does she feels about stepping into the same shoes as the now-very-famous Khumalo? “It is such an amazing feeling. My first major role and I’m really excited and humbled. A bit of a nerve-racking task, but I have faith in myself.”  She has been acting since primary school, “that’s when I
knew for sure I wanted to perform. I think my family might have thought it was
a phase,” she jokes. But things got serious when she found herself spending more time around the arts, drama class, choir practice and the like. “I then went to the National School of the Arts for my Grades 8 and 9 and moved to Dominican Convent School to finish, where I also did drama,” Dlamini says. In 2014 she attained a BA degree in Dramatic Arts from the University of Pretoria. The year after that she landed her first job in The Lion King on the West End in London. The return of Sarafina! brings with it the possibility of some new changes to the original and apparently audiences can expect more than just a few fresh faces. “The audience can expect high energy and stunning harmonies,” she says. And working with the legendary Mbongeni Ngema? “It’s been hectic. He knows exactly what he wants. He also has lovely stories that really inspire a performer, which helps as it’s a large cast. The amount of talent in that room is so exciting and overwhelming. We all bring something special to this production.” Sarafina! runs at the State Theatre in Pretoria from February 28. Tickets start at R120. Book online here: 