Politicians and special guests rocked the red carpet outside Parliament ahead of President Jacob Zuma&rsquo;s state of the nation address. Sona fashion has vastly improved over the years, with the men taking more risks (not always on point) than the women who insist on wearing overly embellished outfits. Here are some of the favourites as well as those that made South Africa cringe. 1. The Tambo family. Son's name is Oliver. Causes a stir among journos #SONA2017 pic.twitter.com/EoGThGSN8n This year we found a rather conservative-looking Dali and Rachel. I&rsquo;m not sure whether to feel disappointed or relieved. Mrs Tambo chose to wear a black and white Marianne Fassler gown with her husband and their son Oliver by her side. Let&rsquo;s all pretend that we&rsquo;re not noticing her pageant hair. 2. Pule and Hleki Mabe. Pule is half the man he used to be. He is avoiding junk food #SONA2017 pic.twitter.com/OllxEJo98u A much slimmer ANC MP Pule Mabe wore the most boring suit known to man to show off his successful diet. Mabe says he finally decided to lay off the junk food. #NewYearNewMe! Hleki Mabe, who wore a beautiful metallic lace dress, accompanied her husband. 3. Mandla Mandela and wife at #SONA2017 pic.twitter.com/KAaIy2oFXu Gasp! Every year without fail Mandla Mandela makes the best-dressed list. He wore traditional Xhosa attire with his pregnant wife Rabia Clarke. The chief of Mvezo village says he makes sure he always captures his culture and tradition on the red carpet, which is inspired by his community. Twitter didn&rsquo;t miss the fact that he wore the same shoes as last year though. 4. Dikeledi Mahlangu in yellow and green on the red carpet #Sona2017 pic.twitter.com/0UDADsZe2B The ANC&rsquo;s Dikeledi Mahlangu brought life to the red carpet in her yellow and green dress. Her head was donned with a gele (Nigerian head gear) with green sheer mesh over a printed yellow dress. Also can we please acknowledge the fact that she wore massive gold hoop earrings to the opening of Parliament?5. Not all MPs are in evening wear ... #SONA2017 pic.twitter.com/6YbuSTOOUR Sigh. Fighter Leigh-Ann Mathys opted to be physically part of the red carpet wearing the Economic Freedom Fighters&rsquo; trademark overalls and a T-shirt that read &ldquo;fear nothing&rdquo;.6. #SONA2017 DA leader Mmusi Maimane and his wife Natalie on the red carpet pic.twitter.com/MqTpAhJKcE Leader of the official opposition party Mmusi Maimane decided to look the same as every other day (rolls eyes) with his wife Natalie wearing an effortless boring off-the-shoulder black dress. 7. Ready for #SONA2017 pic.twitter.com/dkKxyMCdWD Another red carpet favourite was the DA&rsquo;s national spokesperson Phumzile van Damme, who always makes an effort and can never be seen without red lipstick. She wore a blue print cape top and doek with navy-blue pants. 8. NFP leader Zanele Magwaza-Msibi attending her first SONA in a long time. #SONA2017 pic.twitter.com/cwgwqusLgT National Freedom Party leader Zanele Magwaza-Msibi wore a perfectly beaded peplum red gown with sneakers! 9. She of the unconventional down to earth #SONA2017 outfits, CT mayor Patricia de Lille. Warm weather outfit pic.twitter.com/ZvSLREypKY Cape Town mayor Patricia de Lille as unconventional as ever said comfort was important to her, which is why she decided to wear this colourful abaya she bought a while ago. 10. Sports Minister Fikile Mbalula arrives at the #SONA2017 red carpet. pic.twitter.com/VQkzV7z2FY It would be highly insulting to compile this list without mentioning Minister of Sport and Recreation Fikile Mbalula. The minister wore brogues with a dark checked suit from his wardrobe. He made it clear that he wore this suit to the boxing awards. Sorry Twitter!