This year’s National Arts Festival comes to a close on Sunday. Make the most of the weekend and catch these shows before it all ends. DANCE Dance Spectrum (Centenary Hall) National School of the Arts July 7 to 8 Ballet at its finest with a touch of Spanish and Contemporary. The learners of this fine institution will bring you all these and few surprises in this show.   Burn (PJ’s) Liquid Fusion July 7 to 8 The 2016 Standard Bank Ovation award-winning production returns. An intense exploration of the relationship between man and the earth. A full-length duet that will be one to remember.   Equilibrium (Centenary Hall) Bowring Levin Dance Company July 8 This amateur dance company is made of nine very skilled dancers. Their dream has always been to dance and it is evident in the performances they give. Don’t miss this. A few pieces by Hope Maimaine and Debbie Rakusin. CABARET AND MUSIC THEATRE   Live Wire Explosions (City Hall) July 7 to 8 A five piece live band and dancers. This will leave you mesmerised. The homies question the identity of the youth through African dance styles like gumboot  Gogo and Big Sister (The Loerie Hangar Buildings) July 7 to 9 A dialogue and musical journey between three generations of women. A mother, a daughter and a granddaughter at different stages of their musical careers. Legendary actress Thembi Mtshali stars in this and it is sure to leave you drawing similarities between the struggles of a nation and those faced by family.   Jezebel (Dicks) July 7 to 8 A woman trapped by the chains of her existence seeks to learn the truth about her family. She was abused as a baby and seeks revenge and tries to the numb the pain through ways that will leave you in shock. MUSIC  Seshego Gospel Choir (Rhodes Chapel) July 7 to 8 A spot of choir music can go down quite well. Who better than SA’s best clap-and-tap choir? This is their third festival in a row and they are sure to bring the heat.  Eastern Apes Money Talks (Slip Stream) July 7 to 8 Some raps for the heads out there. These brothers have that new age flavour on lock. So much so that they have even attracted the attention of an international recording label. Don’t sleep on them.  Samthing Soweto (Thomas Pringle Hall) July 7 to 8 Soweto is definitely in the building! One of the founding members of The Soil, you have to peep this brother do his thing to actually wrap your head around it. So much sauce it actually shouldn’t be allowed. FILM  Okapi (Ntsikana Room, The Monument) July 7 to 9 Director: Thabo Motlhabi “Sharp-edged steel blade knife with a brown handle and a silver ring on top. The knife comes with two types of grading: the 3-star and the 7-star. Its initial intention was for DIY and slaughtering at ceremonies. In Kimberley it quickly gained popularity for its protective powers with criminals.” Nuff said.  Nongqawuse and the great Xhosa cattle killing (Ntsikana Room, The Monument) July 7 to 8 This film will take a close look at this unique and still unanswered part of Xhosa history. THEATRE Woza Albert July 7 to 9 This a classic fam. I don’t need to say too much. If you haven’t seen this then you have the chance to do so now. If you have, then watch it again. Why are you fronting?  Kid Casino (The Loerie Hangar Buildings) July 7 to 9 This follows two kids as they run free in sun stars Casino Arcade. While their mom is at the slots they let their imaginations run wild. COMEDY  The Full Morty (Bowling Club) July 8 This will be the last performance of this show that definitely had the streets of Grahamstown talking. The mind of the South African male: watch it get unpacked for your enjoyment. From The Classroom To The Stage July 7 and 8 I had the pleasure of seeing this sister perform at Blacks Only a few weeks back and she is an absolute boss. Probably one of the most slept on comedian in it right now. Don’t believe me? Fine, go and see her.