President Jacob Zuma has lauded stalwarts for their contribution made to this year&rsquo;s extended policy conference.During a walk-about in the exhibition centre, Zuma told the media that he was impressed by the level of debate at this year&rsquo;s conference. He singled out &ldquo;stalwarts&rdquo; and &ldquo;young people&rdquo; for making valuable contributions during the discussions, which have been ongoing since Friday.The president said that the additional two days that had been added to the conference had enabled more &ldquo;clarity&rdquo; on certain issues. The additional two days had originally been set aside as a compromise to appease stalwarts and veterans who had called for a national consultative conference to discuss things that they believe are ailing the organisation. However, those stalwarts &ndash; who include Frank Chikane, Mavuso Msimang and Cheryl Carolus &ndash; boycotted the conference, saying that days were not adequate because they would not be able to make any binding resolutions during that time. During his opening address on Friday, Zuma repeatedly spoke off the cuff, addressing the absent elders.&ldquo;Anginazi ukuthi nadalwa kanjani (I don&rsquo;t know how you are built). People take your right, you just keep quiet because you are the only ones who can hire and fire, not so? Senilale thina ngoba sesihamba kancane, sijikisamakhanda kancane. Sesithatha iyikhundla zenu maybabo (you now listen to those who walk slowly and turn their heads slowly. You are allowing those of us like that to take your rights/position),&rdquo; he said midway through the speech, which lasted more than an hour.Before concluding the address with a quote from Oliver Tambo, he returned once again to the issue of the stalwarts.&ldquo;You know that the reason why we have seven days, it is because some comrades who call themselves stalwarts/veterans went around the country organising other comrades because they had some views,&rdquo; he told delegates.&ldquo;We had agreed that this will happen but they decided no this is not what they wanted. They want their own, it is very funny. They are like a real organisation, I am sure they must have an office operating, I don&rsquo;t know I am just guessing because they are very organised. They said to the [secretary general&rsquo;s office] that they don&rsquo;t think the quality of the discussion here will be at a high level, they need serious discussion. So these are the people who claim they have an understanding of the ANC. &ldquo;The branches that are the organisation they think no ... just riff-raff, they want a discussion at a very high level.&rdquo;Veteran Andrew Mlangeni who was seated on stage stood up and walked out during the attack.