University of Johannesburg student Zotha Mbuthweni put her trust in a rental agency to find accommodation but ended up sleeping in an unlocked flat in Johannesburg for three weeks.She enrolled at UJ this year and wanted to live off campus. Together with her relatives, she approached a rental agency &ndash; National Letting &ndash; and got a place in Hermitage Terrace in Auckland Park in February. Mbuthweni told City Press that she did not expect that she would be exposed to potential danger.However, she claimed that she was told not to worry that the door could not lock because there was a security guard. Also, an oven and a washing machine that were displayed in the flat showroom as part of facilities before she moved in were not there once she occupied the flat.In addition, Mbuthweni said she was promised that wi-fi and a shower curtain would be provided. However, these were only provided weeks later, after she complained. Her disgruntled mother, Ntombizakhe Cele-Mbuthweni, said the main problem was that the flat on display indicated that the accommodation came fully furnished. When her daughter moved into the apartment, it was not furnished as promised.&ldquo;There were beds with a thin sponge [mattress], not a proper mattress. There was no oven, no microwave, no washing machine,&rdquo; she said.&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve been receiving about 10 emails from the debt collectors that I owe utility bills. I was told to pay R1 492 for the late payment. The worse part of it is the tenancy agreement is for a 12-month period Starting from the February 1 2017 to January 31 2018.They know very well there will be no students in December and January in their accommodation. My daughter is finishing at the end of November, therefore, December and January she won&rsquo;t be there,&rdquo; Cele-Mbuthweni said.Property owner Ahmad Banoo said the contractor of the building did not hand over all the keys.&ldquo;The building has 24-hour security. I believe this was resolved after we replaced all the locks where keys were not available ... the show flat had no washing machine nor an oven. The kitchen and electrical installation in the units are not designed to accommodate ovens.&rdquo;He said he had liaised with National Letting managing partner Lauretta Slabber, who confirmed that the flat on show was fully furnished because they wanted it to look nice. &ldquo;Lauretta has confirmed that they did not inform prospective tenants that a washing machine and oven would be supplied. They did state that a coin operated laundromat would be installed. This is scheduled for the end of the month,&rdquo; Banoo said.He confirmed that the wi-fi was installed at the end of April because the fibre had not been installed in the area.&ldquo;I arranged a wireless connection and the wi-fi is uncapped. A shower curtain was installed late also. I apologise for this delay,&rdquo; Banoo said.He said the building was not accredited [for student accommodation] by UJ because it was completed after the date for accreditation closed.&ldquo;I have already submitted my documents for accreditation for 2018 &ndash; this process has not been finalised by the university,&rdquo; Banoo said.In an email signed by National Letting chief executive Francois Griessel but sent by Slabber, the agency denied that the show flat had a washing machine and an oven. It also undertook to investigate the billing account of the tenant to see whether her account was in arrears.This article forms part of a series on student accommodation in South Africa. Other articles in the series are: