Johannesburg’s freshest new venue Joziburg Lane at No. One Eloff Street invites you to visit the visionary new complex for an unmatched experience of Joburg culture. From the end of July Joziburg Lane will be hosting a string daily events which include food, film, exhibitions and rooftop parties. Sifiso Khanyile’s June 16 documentary Uprize will screen at the first of The Film Noire screenings on Wednesday, 26 July. Thursday, 27July will be the opening night for The Kollektive Pop Up Gallery who will also be hosting a talk the next day. Saturdays in the city will never be the same after Joziburg’s rooftop hosts The Feel Good Sessions on the 29th. Melo B Jones will be live and on the decks along with a hot line-up of DJs and Sunday will see the most cutting- edge art and music with Joziburg-based, The Bubblegum Club’s New Sound Night. August’s programme is set to be just as exciting. Here is a breakdown of the events which you cannot miss: Wednesday, 26 July - Film Noire Screenings, 7pm Film Noire’s mission is to bring the power of cinematic storytelling to the people of Johannesburg through monthly screenings. The screenings will feature a selection of must-see documentaries and films from African filmmakers as well as classics produced in the country, the continent as well as across the diaspora. The first screening will feature the recently premiered Uprize by Sifiso Khanyile, giving a glimpse into 1970s South Africa. Thursday, 27 July - The Kollective Pop Up Gallery, 7pm Kulture Kollective will launch its pop up gallery which will see them partnering up with some exciting creatives around fashion, sneaker culture, art and design. They will incorporate unconventional elements and curated visual journeys for innovative exhibitions. Every last Thursday over the next five months, the gallery will be introducing a new artist collaboration around a night market setting where there will be drinks, cocktails and food to match the environment. Anthony Bila, Nicholas Rawhani and Chisanga Mubanga are this month's artists. Friday, 28 July -  Talks/workshops held at The Kollective Gallery, 4pm-7pm Following Kollective Gallery’s first exhibition in collaboration with The Uncultured Club on 27 July, the first conversation will be with Anthony Bila, Nicholas Rawhani and Chisanga Mubanga of The Uncultured Club.      Bubbles the DJ DodaBhibo (from Until Until)Scott The GirlThemba Lunacy Zanele & Zodwa (founders and resident DJs of Sunday143) Melo B Jones who has just released her EP, The Start, will be performing live. Ticket price: R50 online and R100 at the door Tickets available at www.quicket.co.za Sunday 30 July – New Sound Night, 2pm New Sound Night is a weekly events platform for upcoming musical projects or newly released music. The event is in partnership with the Bubblegum Club \and will include singles, mixtapes, EPs and album launches or listening sessions with artists. Cape Town-based electronic kwaito duo Stiff Pap will be performing a fusion of kwaito, gqom, house and hip hop jams from their EP 'Based on a Qho Story'. The rest of the line up includes Bo's Hub, DJ Mdubulo, Fiji Fantanaand one half of Stiff Pap, Jakinda.   