All the negativity on the #GuptaLeaks emails, which implicate some of the ANC ministers and some premiers should send the ruling party scurrying. Clearly the ruling party does not learn and doesn’t listen. One would have thought that when the ruling party was punished by the voters during the 2016 local government elections due to the lack of accountability and arrogance of its leadership it would have woken up and conducted its business differently. The ANC promised to embark on a voter analysis, which would have helped it to identify the exact cause of failing to maintain its victory in the metros. Whatever results it received on the project didn’t teach it anything because we still see the same mistakes over and again. President Jacob Zuma and the national executive committee do not realise the danger in which they are putting the ruling party by failing to pose a successful motion of no confidence against him on a number of occasions or at least ask him to resign voluntarily. They will only realise how important this was when they cross the general election bridge. Unfortunately it will be too late to rectify the mistake. They have all the evidence of corruption at their disposal to remove him, in fact, he himself is quite aware of how corrupt he is but they still maintain his innocence. Comrades who voice their concerns on the poor leadership the president has been displaying are being attacked. Some people have called for their removal from the ranks within the party and have labelled them ill-disciplined because they spoke out against their beloved president. READ: Makhosi Khoza to be charged with ill-discipline Zuma got rid of the most competent and respected comrades in the finance portfolio because they would not bow to his instructions of signing corrupt deals, hiding behind the so-called prerogative privilege as vested in him by the Constitution. This has resulted in economic meltdown and still he does not believe he is the culprit of the state our economy is in. The president does not feel ashamed by all the scandals that have been put in the public domain that involves his corrupt dealings with the Gupta family. The stalwarts who have been trying to engage him on the issues are called names. These are people who gave their lives to the well-being of the ANC. Their only sin was to try to offer their contribution in order to come up with solutions to the problems the ruling party is currently facing but the president won’t budge. The ANC originally had leaders who were driven by principles, leaders who had values, morals and ethics. Where are those leaders who emanate from the values and principles of Oliver Tambo? The true leaders who are not driven by greed and corruption but serve in the interests of our country? If Zuma was serious about clearing his name (he maintains his innocence) as well as other ministers who are implicated in the state capture report he would have implemented the recommendations made by the former public protector within 30 days. And he would allow the chief justice to appoint the presiding judge who will oversee the commission and not argue. President Zuma should stop hiding behind the Constitution, which he does not even respect. He needs to be informed that he cannot be allowed to appoint a judge on this matter because he is implicated. The ANC should stop misleading us by calling for the terms of reference to be broadened because this is just a delaying tactic. We need to deal with the Gupta problem at hand and consider an investigation into the alleged influence by business later. The success of the ANC in the 2019 general elections will be determined by who wins in the December conference. Based on the survey that I and other fellow comrades had embarked on, Comrade Cyril Ramaphosa is one of the good leaders in our movement who will bring hope not only to the health of the ANC but also to the country at large. We understand he might not be liked by those who endorse corruption. As we are heading towards the debate for the motion of no confidence against the president the speaker of Parliament should agree to a secret ballot to protect MPs who are principled. They should therefore vote with their conscience and not according to the party line. They should ignore all the noise made by the political hooligans who are still supporting the president. The ANC should understand that no political party has ever won elections with its own membership alone. It requires the ordinary members of our society to ensure their victory, hence it needs to listen to them. • Monwabisi Ndabankulu is a concerned member of the ANC.