Schools in Vuwani reopened today after a tumultuous few weeks of disruptions after community protests prevented learners attending classes. Dr Naledzani Rasila, communications spokesperson for the Limpopo department of education, told City Press that they welcomed the decision taken by the community leaders as well as government to allow teaching in schools to resume. &ldquo;We now urge learners, teachers and all stakeholders to not waste any more time. As a department, we are looking at a catch-up plan so that these learners can be on par with other learners in the province,&rdquo; Rasila said. He said attendance in schools today was not great and urged pupils to start attending classes again. &ldquo;Please, as a department we are urging all learners to appreciate the calm which has been restored and return to school.&rdquo; Yesterday, President Jacob Zuma was meant to address large crowds which had gathered at the Vuwani sports grounds in Limpopo. Instead, Zuma &ndash; along with his delegation &ndash; quickly left the scene after the crowds started booing Limpopo MEC for cooperative governance, housing and traditional affairs, Makoma Makhurupetsa. Irate residents had gathered from around 8am as they waited to be addressed by Zuma on the developments surrounding the meeting which he had had with the traditional leadership of Vuwani last Tuesday. Protests flared up in the community after residents were protesting against the municipal demarcation. As a tragic consequence of the protests in the area, several schools were torched and learners were unable to attend school after the town came to a complete halt. On April 18, whilst the rest of the country began their second term of schooling, schools in Vuwani remained closed. The presidency today issued a statement saying Zuma welcomed the reopening of schools today, after it was decided that the community of Vuwani will be serviced by Vhembe District municipality in the meantime, &ldquo;while a solution to the demarcation issue is being sought&rdquo;. &ldquo;The engagement has been a success. We are pleased that the community members have agreed to the reopening of schools. Schools and other essential services should not be affected. Children should learn and other services must be delivered until we find a permanent solution,&rdquo; Zuma said in the statement. This was the first of many steps towards finding a lasting solution, he added.