The goal is simple: save the ANC to save South Africa.And for ANC stalwarts and veterans, saving the ANC requires that the ruling party be able to honestly examine itself &ndash; and its problems. Only then can the party map a new way forward. In a press briefing Tuesday, the party&rsquo;s stalwarts and veterans reiterated their calls for the ANC&rsquo;s National Executive Conference to facilitate a National Consultative Conference, as they initially requested at the end of last year. According to the stalwarts, the purpose of a National Consultative Conference would be to give the party the opportunity for some much-needed introspection. The consultative conference would be a non-sectarian space where people would be able to freely &ndash; in true ANC style &ndash; engage with the party&rsquo;s issues, said ANC stalwart Murphy Morobe. &ldquo;We will all emerge with a common perspective of the problems, but what we need to do is reconstruct the ANC and reposition it to be the leader of society we always claimed it to be.&rdquo;But in order to do so, the consultative conference must be separate from the ANC&rsquo;s national policy conference, the stalwarts said. &ldquo;The ANC is in a crisis and the crisis in the ANC has permeated, to the extent that it is affecting the functioning of government and state institutions,&rdquo; Morobe said. &ldquo;For the National Consultative Conference to be effective and do what it is designed to do, it should not be coupled with the policy conference. They are very different conferences in terms of form and in terms of content.&rdquo;The stalwarts are scheduled to send a statement detailing a history of their meetings regarding the establishment of a consultative conference to the NEC this weekend. Recent responses from the NEC have led stalwarts to suspect that the NEC has not been receiving comprehensive reports of previous meetings.&ldquo;We cannot delay the occasioning of this important intervention,&rdquo; Morobe said.&ldquo;The longer we don&rsquo;t do it, we open up the situation for greater opportunism that might eventually undermine the sense of security that everyone deserves in their own constitution.&rdquo;And according to the stalwarts, the NEC must play its role as dictated by the ANC constitution. The moral outrage seen in nationwide protests in recent months were a sign that there have not been the necessary platforms of internal engagement within the ANC, said stalwart Sydney Mufumadi.&ldquo;People want to feel that they are governed by a government that is accountable, that remains loyal to the collective interests of the nation. The NEC has to demonstrate that it understands that message.&rdquo;While the dominant discourse has focused on the possible recall of President Jacob Zuma, the issues facing the ANC run deeper than just one person, according to the stalwarts. Citing the report by the South African Council of Churches, stalwart Sheila Sisulu said that the problems South Africa currently face are systemic, not individual incidences. &ldquo;It was a project to capture the state. Some of us would go as far as to say through capturing the ANC, then capturing the state,&rdquo; Sisulu said. But according to Reverend Frank Chikane, that is counter tto the ANC&rsquo;s origins. &ldquo;We said we [would] seize power for the people, not for individual interest.&rdquo;Ultimately, the stalwarts hope to save the ANC by bringing the party back to its original values and principles through a consultative conference. &ldquo;The ANC will survive and must survive all these shenanigans,&rdquo; Sisulu said.&ldquo;That is what we want to have a discussion about &ndash; how to make sure the true ANC emerges after the consultations.&rdquo;