Move over Zumba, Somizi is in the house! Popularly known as somGAGA, Somizi Mhlongo has released a dance workout DVD inspired by many South African dance moves. But there is a catch, like with any other exercise regime: a healthy diet plays a major role in getting the desired results. So, the DVD comes with a nutrition plan that will guide and simplify the process. It gives more than five options for breakfast, lunch and supper, and also what to snack on in between. As someone who loves food and working out, I’d advise you to follow the guidelines this DVD offers. Even if you’re like me and can’t dance, you’ll enjoy the routines that target different parts of the body. And, yeah, you will feel the burn... The DVD has a level for beginners, which works out the legs and upper body, and a core session that he recommends you should do for at least 10 minutes, regardless of your level. Then there is an advanced level that gets more hectic as it requires a more rigorous tempo and movement. That is where this DVD lost me – like I said, I can’t dance. It really had me battling with my two left feet. This was a challenge. I don’t dance at all unless otherwise encouraged (hint: alcohol. Eish, Granny, if you are reading this, I am sorry). But for people who really like dancing, this would be a perfect reason to start something in terms of a workout regimen that can also be enjoyed. In the advanced workout, somGAGA has you doing ingwazi with light weights. The speed with which workouts are done makes this a challenging routine. Unfortunately, general dancing and velocity are not part of my vocabulary. The final chapter of the workout had me trying things I would never do again, especially when sober. I know of a lot of people who love dancing and I think this is something they can get into to get their workout rituals started. The DVD has beautiful aesthetics – the lovely Cape Town background does justice to the video – plus Somizi is a character of note. So, while I don’t like dance workout routines, I really enjoyed trying out Grind! with Somizi. This DVD is a must for anyone who wants to lose weight while having fun doing it.