Mayor Herman Mashaba delivers his state of the city address this morning. How has he done during his nine months of office?The businessman-turned politician was sworn in as a Johannesburg city councillor in August last year, after a campaign run largely on promises of cutting corruption and improving service delivery, and swiftly introduced a 10-point plan for the city.&nbsp;The ANC believes he has not delivered on his promises. Here&rsquo;s Mashaba&rsquo;s progress evaluated by the opposition:Loading...1. Ensure that the entire City adjusts its mindset to the environment of a new coalition governmentANC Joburg region spokesperson Jolidee Matongo believes that this point was &ldquo;totally irrelevant&rdquo; and that &ldquo;Mashaba has begun a programme to divide the people of Joburg&rdquo;. He bases this on integrated development plan meetings in which &ldquo;community members were forced out&rdquo;, thereby denying them their constitutional right to participate in shaping the city&rsquo;s plans.2. Run a responsive and pro-poor governmentThis sounded positive, Matongo says, but Mashaba&rsquo;s actions proved to be anti-poor. The cancellation of Jozi@Work programme &ldquo;practically condemns&rdquo; 8000 people to unemployment and prevents another 50 000 Joburgers from benefiting from the programme over the next four years.3. Achieve a minimum 5% economic growthThe ANC says this &ldquo;ambitious&rdquo; plan should be supported but that ANC says that, despite numerous requests, the Democratic Alliance has not submitted its plan to achieve this.&ldquo;So a 5% economic growth was thumb-sucked and not based on any scientific research.&rdquo;4. Create a professional civil service that serves the residents of Joburg with prideThis &ldquo;pre-supposed&rdquo; that the city of Johannesburg was filled with incompetent people who didn&rsquo;t serve the residents with pride.Matongo accuses Mashaba of appointing &ldquo;former DA Councillors to city positions&rdquo; and &ldquo;attempts by Mashaba to fire senior managers simply because they were employed by the ANC government&rdquo;.5. Ensuring corruption is public enemy number oneThe ANC supports the fight against corruption. However, Matongo accuses Mashaba of turning Johannesburg into a police state where the metro police department &ldquo;is used to suppress residents and abandoning their traffic management and by-law enforcement responsibilities&rdquo;.Matongo says &ldquo;we are yet to see tangible evidence of investigations done by Mashaba&rdquo;.He would also like to see the City Power forensic investigation report, to find out &ldquo;how many millions were paid in pursuit of a corruption ghost at City Power&rdquo;.6. Produce an official housing waiting listThis waiting list was initiated by the ANC government.7. Produce a list of semi-completed housing unitsMatongo says he hasn&rsquo;t seen the list of semi-completed housing units in Johannesburg. &ldquo;But we have seen completed social housing units in Devland ward 24 standing idle and being vandalised in the process.&rdquo; He also says that the Kliptown Turn-key housing development, which has been cancelled, would have accommodated 1200 families.8. Fast-track the delivery of title deedsMashaba &ldquo;rushed to issue title deeds that he found ready for delivery to rightful owners&rdquo;. Matongo says Mashaba needs to deliver more title deeds, as promised.9. Initiate a pilot project for a clinic to operate for extended hoursA clinic operating for extended hours has been piloted. We are monitoring the functioning of this clinic.10. Revitalise the inner city of JohannesburgNothing has been done on this, and the ANC initiated Inner City Property Scheme has been relegated as a non-priority for the city, says Matongo.