Cosatu took a firm stance against President Jacob Zuma on Tuesday when the trade union announced that the president is not welcome to address its activities. The Special Central Executive Committee (SCEC) of Cosatu met on Monday to analyse the National May Day Celebrations held on May 1, amongst other topics. Cosatu briefed the media on the outcomes of that meeting. When Zuma attended the May Day celebration rally in Bloemfontein, he was booed by attendees. Cosatu was criticised for his attendance after the trade union made calls for Zuma to step down in April. &ldquo;The SCEC also took time to deal with the sentiments expressed by some of our members before May Day, who felt that allowing President Jacob Zuma to address our May Day event in Bloemfontein was inconsistent with our position calling for him to step down,&rdquo; Cosatu general secretary Bheki Ntshalintshali said. Cosatu acknowledged that the decision was not consistent, which is why the organisation is now making it clear that Zuma is not welcome at Cosatu activities. Cosatu reiterated its commitment to the tripartite alliance though.&ldquo;We also remain a reliable ally of the ANC. We want to see an ANC that will not only rediscover its mass character but that will use its organisational mass power to assert a people-driven and a people-centred development,&rdquo; Ntshalintshali said. There were also questions raised at the press conference about why Cosatu president, Sidumo Dlamini attended Zuma&rsquo;s birthday celebration in April. Ntshalintshali said the committee did not discuss Dlamini&rsquo;s attendance at Zuma&rsquo;s birthday celebration. He said that Dlamini was in attendance as an ANC national executive committee member, even though Dlamini was introduced as a Cosatu representative at the celebration. Cosatu also announced some of the issues it plans to address at its next Central Committee meeting, which is scheduled for next week from May 29 to June 1. Some of the issues include &ldquo;an urgent need to convene a job summit and a fight against severe rise in employment&rdquo; and radical economic transformation.