The Eastern Cape provincial government has distanced itself from the planned coronation of Zanozuko Tyelovuyo Sigcau as king of the amaMpondo by a group within the nation. Imbumba yamaMpondo, a group that supports Zanozuko, is adamant that he be crowned king, despite the Constitutional Court ruling that set aside his appointment. Zanozuko was officially recognised by President Jacob Zuma as king of the amaMpondo in 2010. But the late king Justice Mpondombini Sigcau challenged Zuma&rsquo;s decision in court. Zuma was acting on the recommendations of the Nhlapo Commission, set up to probe traditional leadership disputes and determine the rightful heirs. In 2010, the commission had recommended that Mpondombini be stripped of his kingship and recognised his nephew, Zanozuko. However, Mpondombini took legal action to challenge the findings.In 2013, a full bench of Constitutional Court judges ruled in favour of Mpondombini posthumously. Mpondombini died in March that year, three months before the judgment. A coronation had been planned for Friday, but because of &ldquo;logistics&rdquo; was postponed to October 12, said Mduduzi Sibulali, secretary of Imbumba yamaMpondo. He said invitations had been extended to Zuma, Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Minister Des van Rooyen and his provincial counterpart MEC Fikile Xasa, and Premier Phumulo Masualle.But Masualle&rsquo;s spokesperson, Mandisa Titi, distanced the provincial government from the planned event. &ldquo;The premier will not associate himself with that [coronation]. There is a ruling by the Constitutional Court. &ldquo;In any case, the premier is guided by [MEC Xasa], who is dealing with matters of traditional leadership. &ldquo;But sometimes traditional leaders and communities do their own things, which is what I think is happening right now. All I can say is that the planned coronation is not a government-inspired event,&rdquo; Titi said. Mamkeli Ngam, Xasa&rsquo;s spokesperson, refused to be drawn on the matter and referred queries to the presidency and the premier&rsquo;s office.Zuma&rsquo;s spokesperson, Bongani Ngqulunga, promised to comment when he returned from Tanzania.AmaXhosa King Mpendulo Sigcawu remains the only monarch to have been officially crowned by Zuma in post-democratic South Africa. That was in 2015.Sibulali said Zanozuko would be crowned the king of amaMpondo with or without government&rsquo;s participation, saying Imbumba yamaMpondo did not need the premier&rsquo;s office to do this. &ldquo;We invited them as government to be part of the celebrations, but if they see themselves as bigger than the amaMpondo nation, it is their business,&rdquo; he said.He added that the Constitutional Court was mistaken regarding the late Mpondombini, as his status was merely that of paramount chief and not that of king.Meanwhile, two other groups are also at odds with Imbumba yamaMpondo and the installation of Zanozuko.Mandilive Cinani, chairperson of the king&rsquo;s council, said the council was against Zanozuko&rsquo;s crowning as the Constitutional Court had dismissed his recognition and affirmed that the kingship remained in the house of Mpondombini. He said his daughter Wezizwe was the next in line. Mpondombini did not have sons. &ldquo;I do not know why government seems to have so much interest in this matter because, after the Constitutional Court judgment, we resolved that Wezizwe should lead the nation. But government is against that,&rdquo; he said, adding that the council&rsquo;s case was pending at the Supreme Court of Appeal in Bloemfontein.Speaking for a third group within the nation last month, Princess Stella Sigcau II threw a spanner in the works, saying the royal family believed that customarily, it was only her brother, Nkosi Nzululwazi Jongilanga Sigcau, who could ascend the throne because he belonged to a more senior house than Zanozuko.