Bidvest Wits defender Reeve Frosler is a doubtful starter for the SA Under-20 side as they kick off their Fifa Under-20 World Cup campaign against Japan today. The lanky lad from Port Elizabeth only arrived at the team’s Ramada Plaza Hotel in Seoul around midnight (6pm SA time) on the eve of the game, after a trip of nearly 24 hours. Frosler was only released by his PSL side after they confirmed their status as the 2016/17 Absa Premiership champions with a 2-0 victory over Polokwane City on Wednesday night. The defender left on Friday evening with a South African group consisting of South African Football Association officials, sponsor representatives and journalists in a trip that went via Hong Kong. Amajita open their campaign today against Japan in a Group D encounter at the Suwon World Cup Stadium. The game kicks off at 5pm local time which is 10am South African time. Frosler, who represented South Africa at the previous Fifa Under-17 World Cup, has been a revelation since starting for Wits in March, as a replacement for injured right-back Nazeer Allie. He has since clocked in 11 league matches that culminated in the league victory on Wednesday. The defender was signed from the Wits junior team in January. Amajita would be hoping for a winning start against opponents who last made an appearance at this competition in 2007. The South African Under-20 team first made their appearance in 2007, again in 2009 and this their third outing. Coached by Thabo Senong the team would be hoping to improve on their last appearance where they were bundled out by fellow Africans Ghana in the last 16 under the tutelage of Coach Serame Letsoaka. Current skipper Tercious Malepe shared the same sentiments when he said ahead of today’s game: “We have come a long way as a team to be where we are today and we have done everything we need to do – what awaits us is the kick off against Japan and we just can’t wait. Our preparations have gone according to plan and we hope that everything we learnt we will implement in the game.” Amajita beat Costa Rica 2-1 in their last warm up game. 