The Gauteng provincial government plans to create new housing projects that are specifically structured to address the apartheid spatial planning in the province.&ldquo;Through mega city developments we are going to transform Gauteng&rsquo;s spatial patterns as part of TMR [Transformation Modernisation and Re-industrialising],&rdquo; said Gauteng Premier David Makhura at the Gauteng Infrastructure Funding Summit. &ldquo;Human settlements projects must integrate residents across colour lines&rdquo; he added.This summit showcased the various projects in order to &ldquo;mobilise funding&rdquo;, said MEC Paul Mashatile&rsquo;s spokesperson Mogomotsi Mogodiri. He said they hoped to attract both local and international investors to fund the projects. These projects include legacy projects, which are ongoing, and mega projects. Should funding be sourced successfully Mogodiri estimated it would take eight years or more to complete the mega projects.Mogodiri said the projects would include building housing and amenities like schools, clinics and retail spaces. &ldquo;We can&rsquo;t build an economy excluding the majority of our citizens,&rdquo; said Makhura.Makhura mentioned that the funding they were seeking for infrastructure did not only refer to housing but to transport, water, energy and ICT as well.&ldquo;We have to do away with building houses in far flung areas where there&rsquo;s no transport infrastructure and economic activities,&rdquo; he added.&ldquo;Gauteng faces challenges of migration as the fastest growing province. New infrastructure funding approaches needed,&rdquo; said South African Local Government Association chairperson Parks Tau.This summit precedes the Gauteng Investment Infrastructure Conference that will take place in July. Continuing the emphasis placed on partnership, the conference will bring together both the public and private sector to source funding. Savannah City housing development is situated Sedibeng area:will have 18000 residential units, schools, clinics, retail #GPInfrastructure pic.twitter.com/FTlKqFhk7v Leeuwpoort megaproject: situated in Ekurhuleni, Boksburg, will have 20 000 units, community facilities, schools, clinics #GPInfrastructure pic.twitter.com/b1417I9md9 Leeuwpoort megaproject: situated in Ekurhuleni, Boksburg, will have 20 000 units, community facilities, schools, clinics #GPInfrastructure pic.twitter.com/b1417I9md9The Montrose Mega City is situated in Randfontein, will have 13 000 residential units, 8 schools, clinics, retail #GPInfrastructure pic.twitter.com/HXVjPBbQfe The John Dube precinct will be situated in Duduza, Nigel, will have 18 000 residential units, social amenities etc. #GPInfrastructure pic.twitter.com/SeLr2m8UBI The Mapleton Mega City will be situated in Vosloorus, Ekurhuleni, will have 21 000 units, clinics, schools, retail etc. #GPInfrastructure pic.twitter.com/c7oYOYPvkz