The weekend came too soon and yours truly was definitely not ready for the weekly ritual at my favourite drinking hole. But like a true leader I led my stokvel like Joseph led his people (I forgot their municipality, it was probably Vuwani though) in the Bible. We rose to the occasion and continued the search for our country&rsquo;s problems at the bottom of the cold soothing brown lager bottles. We can confirm they are not there but we shall soldier on. While in the middle of our search Dabulamanzi, son of Jele, the first-ever native to own a shack in this part of this eastern Transvaal (so he says), sparked a debate about the blue democrats showing their true colours and charging Mbali, daughter of the house of Ntuli. &ldquo;All she did was like a comment that said the madam is a racist and she was charged like a black puppet stepping out of line. That party will never rule this country and this is the party Julius is in bed with,&rdquo; said Dabula, slowly losing his grip on his sobriety.As usual, like we always do on DA-related issues, we indicated by a show of hands whether he was too drunk or we were too sober to talk about the party of the madam on such a beautiful day. Needless to say the latter opinion won and we moved on to matters of national importance.However, Dabula did mention that he heard on the wireless that apparently Thabo Mbeki will be returning from his nine-year paternity unpaid leave to replace Msholozi. We all agreed that, according to the new Eskom precedent, the return of the renaissance son of the soil was well in sight. Speaking about Eishkom, the Megawatt honchos seem to have taken a paid permanent leave from logical thinking, eish! Yours truly thinks the board of Eishkom needs to visit the Saxonwold shebeen for a good session of soothing refreshments (and maybe consider staying there for good).The former defenders of the working class of Cosatu House have now officially banned the great Jacob of Nkandla from attending their gatherings.Poor Jacob, first it was the funerals now even the non-working defenders of workers are banning him. So in order to remain politically relevant, yours truly also publicly declares that number one is not allowed to grace any of our drinking sessions or stokvel meetings.In fact, I will personally pen a letter to our Ford Kuga-driving (we truly hope that car too burns) shiny white suit-wearing, thieving, lying ward councillor of ours. The letter will state that, as far as Msholozi is concerned, a B.A.N is requested!While still on requests, apparently there is a high demand for Community Liaison Information Technology (C.L.I.T) requests at the Union Building and great honourables over there do not want to miss out on the action too. Luckily, one great honourable Radebe (Mjeffnana to those who know him better) confessed he erred in his request and like any honourable stokvel chairperson and president would do, yours truly A.C.C.E.P.T.E.D the A.P.O.L.O.G.Y as I also wait on many other apologies from many others.&bull; Majakathata the Rogue is a comrade, director of Nahab (National Association of Husbands and Boyfriends) and chairperson of Asphuzeni Stokvel in Skomplaas, Mashishini. He pens in his personal capacity as a veteran patron of SAB.