With the dress rehearsal for a national coalition in 2019 in full swing, the DA has calculated down to voting district level how many votes it will need to bring the ANC to less than 50%.DA federal chairperson Athol Trollip told City Press: &ldquo;In 2019, our target is to be the core or leading party in a coalition that will replace the ANC. We have already determined exactly how many votes we need from each target.&ldquo;Every provincial leader, every provincial chairperson and every branch activist knows that they need so many votes out of each voting district, each ward and each province. We have been given the targets,&rdquo; he said.The idea of a national coalition of opposition parties governing South Africa from 2019 is fast gaining momentum.Tomorrow will see yet another day of action as opposition parties and civil society look to take a mass demonstration to the Constitutional Court precinct in Joburg. The highest court in the land will once again hear arguments brought by opposition parties that, this time, are looking for a ruling that will give Parliament the green light to make use of a secret ballot in an upcoming motion of no confidence against President Jacob Zuma.The United Democratic Movement (UDM) brought the matter before the Constitutional Court and was later joined by other political parties as well as civil society.Those who have brought the matter believe that a secret ballot will allow ANC MPs to vote against Zuma without fear of a backlash from the party. The latest motion of no confidence followed a late-night Cabinet reshuffle by the president that saw the axing of, among others, former finance minister Pravin Gordhan, former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas and former tourism minister Derek Hanekom. After the move, three of the ANC&rsquo;s top six came out publicly against the reshuffle, but later said it had been a mistake to air the ANC&rsquo;s dirty laundry in public.The march, which starts at Mary Fitzgerald Square in the CBD, is another demonstration that follows a series of similar days of action that have been a collaborative effort by opposition parties who are calling for Zuma to step down, among other demands related to the running of the country.While parties have not agreed on all demonstrations, party leaders say this is not an indication that they don&rsquo;t always get along.DA leader Mmusi Maimane said that, for various reasons, opposition parties would not all participate in programmes all of the time, however, what mattered was that they had been successful where the parties governed as a coalition.&ldquo;We are not going to always work together on everything. For example, there are some who want to save the ANC. We must be careful not to assume that just because somebody is in the opposition, they are in opposition to the ANC. There are people who are only in opposition to Jacob Zuma. I am in opposition to the whole of the ANC,&rdquo; Maimane said.Having succeeded in winning three major metros in coalition after last year&rsquo;s local government elections, the DA is convinced that it can lead a national coalition government in 2019.&ldquo;What has been good for the DA is that we don&rsquo;t want to win everything, because if you try to win everything, you end up losing everything. So, for the next elections, we want to lead a coalition government in 2019,&rdquo; Trollip said.Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) leader Julius Malema told City Press that a 2019 agreement regarding a coalition with any party had not yet been reached, but that the EFF was not ruling it out.&ldquo;We are going to plan in a manner that suggests we want to take over the state and not through a coalition. We are not excluding coalition talks in our planning. If it so happens that we need to get into a coalition, those discussions will take place at that time,&rdquo; he said.&ldquo;It is not automatic that a coalition will be with the DA or the UDM. It will be with a party that agrees on fundamental issues that are non-negotiable in the EFF. As you know, we refused to be in a coalition in 2016 because none of the parties could accommodate what we stand for.&rdquo;