Forget the traditional broadcast and pay-TV moulds. A new player is letting viewers choose the channel category packages they want and the subscription models they prefer. Digital Entertainment on Demand is going live in South Africa, offering a selection of rental and subscription video entertainment on-demand services, including news and sports internet TV channels, direct to viewers’ phones, tablets, and laptops. The biggest difference between Digital Entertainment on Demand and other online entertainment services is the ability to pick and choose what content category you wish to watch or subscribe to, with no obligation to take everything on offer. This means you only pay for what you want to watch – and you choose how to package and pay for it from a selection of options. “Viewers today want freedom of choice. They want customisable, affordable access to movies, news, sports, music and TV series wherever they are,” said Discover Digital managing director, Stephen Watson. “Our disruptive new model breaks the traditional broadcast and pay-TV moulds by letting viewers choose the channel category packages they want and what subscription models they prefer.” The prices start from R49 for the News Service and R99 for the Sports Service, to R189 for the Premium Package which includes all news and live sports (local and international) channels, DEOD Sports Network (DSN) and a selection of series, music videos and movies on-demand. A rental service also offers viewers the option to rent a selection of movies from the latest off cinema to classics on a pay-per-view basis from as little as R18. “Discover Digital’s highly flexible platforms mean we can constantly repackage content and bouquets to meet viewer demands,” he said. “For example, we offer a sports pack of five world sports channels including the Motorvision motorsports channel, Sportskool, Channel Edge HD extreme sports, Fightbox HD, and the Nautical Sailing and Boating Channel. We have a news pack of leading global news channels including Al Jazeera, Africanews, Euronews, Bloomberg, Russia Today and France24, One of the standouts for Discover Digital is its ability to offer live sport matches which ShowMax and Netflix don’t offer. It gives them a chance to challenge MultiChoice’s Digital Satellite Television (DStv) which has been the only pay station able to offer live sport matches over the years. Other channels will be added soon, including BBC World News. It offers short-term Premium subscriptions that give viewers access just for a weekend at R49 or just a week at R69, as well as special interest channels and bouquets for children and music lovers as well as faith and inspiration-related programming.” “As a full-service, video on demand business, we want to use the increased connectivity consumers now have access to, to deliver more entertainment in a number of ways. The opportunity in Africa is to deliver to mobile phones a broad range of digital entertainment – from video and TV to music, magazines. “We believe everybody deserves to have access to quality, affordable content and we will continue to challenge the status quo of competitive offerings and expand our services to merge lifestyle and entertainment to take it to consumers when and how they want it.” This digital offering follows in the footsteps of ShowMax subsidiary of Naspers which launched in 2015. Last year it was reported to have reached 10 million views. One of the world’s biggest streaming video services, Netflix, launched in South Africa last year but it still lags behind ShowMax in terms of offering local content.