The DA&rsquo;s newly elected Eastern Cape leader was left red-faced with embarrassment when he did not show up on time for the official announcement of his appointment.Nqaba Bhanga was nowhere to be found yesterday when it was announced after a two-day congress that he had emerged victorious over outgoing chairperson Veliswa Mvenya.In what was a hotly contested event, an all-male top six was elected as the new leaders of the party in the Eastern Cape where the DA governs the Nelson Mandela Bay metro.Bhanga &ndash; who joined the party in 2014 &ndash; now takes over the reins from Athol Trollip, who serves as the party&rsquo;s federal chairperson.&ldquo;Whatever the reason for him not being here, it was poor form. I don&rsquo;t know what the reasons were; I haven&rsquo;t heard from him what they are,&rdquo; Trollip said to journalists.&ldquo;It&rsquo;s really a pity considering our national leader was here and gave the most visionary speech.&rdquo;Trollip seemed to offer support to Bhanga during his farewell speech yesterday when he said that party newcomers should never be undermined. He said that, if a party looked down on newcomers, it would signal its death.Celebrations soon turned into panic when Bhanga could not be located. People from his communications team said that his phone had been switched off and that they had last seen him on Friday evening. Bhanga &ndash; who was previously in the ANC and the Congress of the People &ndash; arrived at the venue more than an hour after the announcement was made, grinning from ear to ear. He first thanked Trollip, whom he said was the most important person in the organisation to him.Addressing allegations that Trollip would continue to govern the province through him, Bhanga said that he was not concerned with accusations that he was a &ldquo;white man&rsquo;s lackey&rdquo;. He said that he celebrated Trollip&rsquo;s success in the party and that he had become both a friend and mentor to him.Continuing his tribute to Trollip, Bhanga said that he had never imagined that he would enjoy such close camaraderie with a white man.The run-up to this weekend&rsquo;s congress was marked by dirty politicking as both sides looked to score cheap points by laying charges against each other with the party&rsquo;s legal commission.The party&rsquo;s federal executive chairperson confirmed that charges had been laid by both sides and that none of the charge held any water.The Eastern Cape&rsquo;s congress is the first of a number to come that will also be hotly contested, with the outcomes having an impact on the federal congress that will take place next year.Mvenya&rsquo;s defeat is a blow to those in the party who are looking for a more radical and progressive leadership that they believe is necessary to help the party break through its voter ceiling. That grouping within the party is looking to make its mark in the upcoming provincial congresses with the view to secure some high-ranking positions in the party next year.Both party leader Mmusi Maimane and Trollip placed great emphasis on unity in the party during their addresses after the congress on Friday. Both referred to the ANC&rsquo;s failure to unite as the reason for the party&rsquo;s decline.&ldquo;We have a culture of internal democracy where we have hard-fought contests. When I was elected in 2002, I won by 16 votes, you can&rsquo;t get closer than that. It was a fiercely contested election,&rdquo; Trollip told City Press.&ldquo;There are two factions, or rather two groupings, and one will win and the other will not. "The challenge is to unite after a congress; what has set us apart from other parties is that we have been able to do that. I lost against Helen and I won against Coetzee, I lost against Lindiwe and that is what happens. "But if you are committed to the party, it is not about the individual or the ego. It is the responsibility of elected leaders to unite the party,&rdquo; he said.The newly elected leadership of the Eastern Cape are: Bobby Stevenson and Terence Fritz (deputy provincial leaders), Andrew Whitfield (provincial chairperson), Yusuf Cassim, Kobus Botha and Marshall Von Buchenroder (deputy provincial chairpersons).