The fact that eight of the 21-member Under-20 team that did duty at the this year’s Under-20 World Cup in South Korea are graduates of the Under-17 World Cup is cause for celebration. Their graduation is in line with the lauded plan by the SA Football Association (Safa) called Vision 2022. In a nutshell, this is a plan formulated in 2014 with a view that it would culminate in South Africa being a world force in football by 2022. Many were sceptical when the plan was unveiled and rightfully so, given that the association has a number of such plans gathering dust at its offices at the hallowed Safa House. There is one that was penned by Carlos Queiroz during his tenure; Stuart Baxter did the same when he was in charge the first time around and highly decorated Brazilian Carlos Alberto Parreira also drew one up. These are well-thought-out documents, diligently penned by individuals who have been hands-on in South African football. However, I digress, back to Vision 2022 I go. Part of the plan that was implemented in 2014 was to put together a group of young players who would be trained to qualify for the Chile Under-17 World Cup in 2015; play in the current Under-20 World Cup in South Korea; graduate to representing South Africa at the Olympic Games in 2020; and eventually make South Africa proud at the 2022 World Cup in Qatar. So the fact that eight of those young men identified back then have made it this far is cause for celebration. The eight are Kobanelo Kodisang, Sibongakonke Mbatha, Wiseman Meyiwa, Mondli Mpoto, Sanele Tshabalala, Tendo Mukumela, Khulekani Kubheka and Reeve Frosler. And with the likes of Thabo Cele, Liam Jordan and Luther Singh, who already ply their trade overseas, joining the group, the future does look bright. Cele, a proud product of the Durban International Under-19 Academy, has been a revelation and the youngster has been rewarded with a contract from Portuguese giants Benfica at the tender age of 20. When speaking to the young bunch of players, one suddenly realises that they also share in the association’s vision. Many players spoken to during this sojourn in South Korea swear that their ambition is to qualify and represent the country in all the global football tournaments mentioned above. They all believe that they have the capability to become worldchampions. However, there is just one small matter that needs urgent attention. While qualifying for global events, South African national teams have failed to move past the first round, save for the 2009 Under-20 class, which, under the leadership of coach Serame Letsoaka, bowed out in the last 16 after being bundled out by eventual champions Ghana. Before yesterday’s game against Uruguay, Amajita were at the bottom of Group D with no hope of qualifying for the knockout phase after a 2-1 loss to Japan and a 2-0 walloping by Italy. The Under-23s returned with two points from two draws in the last Olympic Games last year in Brazil. Banyana Banyana were also bundled out in the first round at the Olympics. The Under-17s also failed to make it past the opening round in Chile. This is a worrying factor and a thorn in the side of South African football that needs to be addressed – pronto. We cannot celebrate qualifying but, at the back of our minds, know that we are not going to make it past the group stages. Coach Thabo Senong has some answers and solutions for this dilemma (see this interview). But the technical team, led by Safa’s technical director Neil Tovey and technical committee chair Natasha Tsichlas, must give the suits heading Safa some direction on how to get ourselves out of this quagmire. The task at hand now should be to tweak the edges of Vision 2022 and see how we can overcome this disease of not getting far in international tournaments. Failure to do so will lead to our hearing the same old song that our coaches are wont to play for us before every tournament and that has now developed a scratch: “We are not going there to make up the numbers.” But in the end, that’s what we are – an addition to the numbers. It’s time South Africa crossed the line from being participants at world events to being competitors. A thin line indeed! . Follow me on Twitter @Sbu_Mseleku