Phuti Mathobela speaks to Lungi Naidoo on her growing music career and wanting to leave a mark in the music industry. Songstress Lungi Naidoo says even with talent, it is not easy to break into the music industry. “One thing that I’ve learnt as an artist is to be patient. Patience and perseverance is very important and it has helped me a lot to be where I am today,” says Naidoo, who has just released a new dance album titled Black Diamond. “I chose the name Black Diamond because I’m black and happily living in Africa,” she says. Her studio album will be launched at Jembe Tavern in Polokwane on Friday. Naidoo, who was born and raised KwaMaphumulo in KwaZulu-Natal, came to “Golihood” to pursue her music career, just after she matriculated. But things didn’t go the way she planned. It turned out to be a long road before her dream came true, and she released two unsuccessful albums. She told City Press that music has seasons and changes more often with time, which is why it is important for artists to always monitor trends to ensure they release when the time is right. “Sometimes the season is for hip-hop, kwaito or house,” she says. Even though Naidoo did background vocals with big names such as Loyiso Bala and Lebo Mathosa, life was tough for her in the competitive industry. But she never gave up on her music journey. “It had to happen for one to understand that it’s not easy. I was willing to take the beating,” she shares. “Having to work with legends like Black Coffee (real name Nkosinathi Maphumulo) was one of the greatest things that I have ever had in my music career. He is such an amazing soul and I’m grateful for the opportunity he gave me. I was featured on his album, in a song titled Love on Fire, which made me grow as an artist,” she says. Black Coffee helped her on her album, and produced two of her songs, Falling and Away With Me. Naidoo has dedicated her album to herself. “It reflects my lifeline because there was a time in my life that I nearly gave up my music career. “I love music, which is what I want to be known for, and it is what I do best,” says Naidoo. But Naidoo is not just a singer; she also believes in giving back. She runs The Lungi Foundation, a non-governmental organisation that supplies food and uniforms to vulnerable children in primary schools. Her message to young people who want to get into the music industry is that they should be prepared to work hard and that “going to school is the key to success”. “They must always remember where they come from and why they are in the industry because fame is nothing, if you can’t bring change in the society,” Naidoo emphasises.