Family and friends of murdered Walter Sisulu University (WSU) final-year medical student Lwando Mantshontsho remembered him as a gifted student and good dancer.Mantshontsho (27) was allegedly killed by fellow students in the early hours of last Friday morning after a fight broke out between students teasing each other over seniority following a night of drinking.His body was found in a pool of blood at his Atlanta residence at the university&rsquo;s Nelson Mandela Drive campus after he was stabbed multiple times. His alleged killers, aged between 20 and 23, handed themselves over to police last weekend and briefly appeared in the Mthatha Magistrates&rsquo; Court on Monday.When he was killed, Mantshontsho had only five months to go before graduating.His uncle Mncedisi Mfukula said the family was devastated by the loss.Mfukula felt sorry for the families of the alleged perpetrators because &ldquo;they did not send their children to school to be murderers&rdquo;. He said the family had high hopes that Mantshontsho would make a successful doctor in a country in desperate need of medical practitioners.&ldquo;His father died in 2014. He is the last born to his mother. You can imagine. Lwando was about to graduate at the end of this year. That is where we would have seen his real talent and potential,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I am reluctant to say this, but I think his death is a lost investment because he has taken his education with him to the grave.&rdquo;Mantshontsho was buried yesterday at his home in Cofimvaba near Queenstown.His elder brother Luvuyo Mpofu said that, despite his youth, he had been very mature and an intellectual. &ldquo;He was the intellectual in the family. He was my best friend. We spoke almost every week with my brother. I last spoke to him a few hours before he passed away. We were discussing my birthday, which is in June, and I told him that I wanted him to attend my party. I did not know I was talking to him for the last time. He was my confidant. I would consult him before I [did] anything,&rdquo; said Mpofu. Nathi Siboko, Mantshontsho&rsquo;s friend and classmate, said during a memorial service held for him at Mthatha General Hospital on Thursday that he had always been baffled by how his friend would receive distinctions when he hardly ever touched his books.&ldquo;He was very lazy. I remember when we were doing our first year, if we had a test to write the following week Lwando would sleep the whole week and not even come to the study centre. As his friends we would go to his room and check on him and see if he was studying. We would finding him chilling, doing nothing. He would only study on Sunday and the test is on Monday. He will come back with a distinction. And I studied the whole week and still struggled on the test or exam. Then I thought to myself, no, I&rsquo;m wasting a lot of time worrying about Lwando when I should have been studying,&rdquo; he said with a chuckle.Siboko said Mantshontsho used to help his friends with their studies, explaining to them concepts they didn&rsquo;t understand.&ldquo;The last name we called him was Touch The Floor. He was a happy guy, he loved to dance and that is why we called him that,&rdquo; Siboko said.Another friend and classmate, Nasiphi Nombekela, said Mantshontsho had been a potential breadwinner who would have brought &ldquo;radical economic transformation&rdquo; to his family.Zincedile Tiya, a former WSU student leader and current president of the university&rsquo;s convocation, said he had launched a campaign to declare the institution an alcohol-free zone after Mantshontsho&rsquo;s death.&ldquo;We know for a fact that we are going to be at loggerheads with the students on this matter ... but this is a debate we are going to win. We are going to intensify security and have constant police raids,&rdquo; said Tiya.Higher Education Minister Blade Nzimande expressed shock and anger at the murder of Mantshontsho, a recipient of funding via the government&rsquo;s National Skills Fund after he was recruited in Grade 12.&ldquo;The circumstances surrounding the death also leave us with a sense of shock and anger, and I call upon all our higher education communities, including students, to always act with discipline and care &ndash; respecting the law and the sanctity of human life all the time,&rdquo; Nzimande said this week.