Night-time construction is set to kick off at the Main Reef interchange immediately, with a budget allocation of R30 million. The congestion along Main Reef road has become a thorn in the side of many motorists who travel along this route daily, and the Johannesburg Roads Agency has embarked on this project to &ldquo;ease congestion and improve access on this key arterial route&rdquo;. Member of the mayoral committee for transport, councillor Nonhlanhla Makhuba told City Press that the construction was set to last until December 15. &ldquo;Construction will be taking place after hours, in order to fast-track the upgrades with minimal interruption to road users,&rdquo; Makhuba said. These are the planned upgrades set to take place: 1. Main Reef/Church: Additional left lane from the northern approach on Church Street;2. Main Reef/Church: An additional left turn lane from the eastern approach on Main Reef Road;3. Main Reef Road: A continuous slip from Main Reef Road west into the M2 Ramp;4. Main Reef/Press: An additional left turn lane from the southern approach of Press Avenue into Main Reef Road;5. Main Reef/Press: An additional left turn lane from the eastern approach of Main Reef Road into Press Avenue;6. Main Reef/Press: An additional through lane from the western approach of Main Reef Road;7. Main Reef/M2 inbound: An additional right turn lane from the M2 into Main Reef Road;8. Main Reef/M2 inbound: An additional through lane form the eastern approach of Main Reef Road;9. Main Reef/Hanover: An additional through lane from the eastern approach of Main Reef Road; and10. Main Reef/Treu: An additional through lane form the eastern approach of Main Reef Road.The contractors that will be working on the project are Nyaleti Engineers and Lone Rock Contractors. &ldquo;As per the rule of employment which is created through construction projects like this, 30% of the jobs must be allocated to local people who live in and around the area by the contractors."They bring in their specialised skills but they must employ workers from the area,&rdquo; Makhuba said. Meanwhile the inquiry surrounding the bridge collapse that occurred on the M1 North in 2015 has taken a sudden halt, after being delayed. The reason for this is unknown. During afternoon traffic along the M1 on October 14 2015, a temporary bridge structure collapsed on vehicles that were travelling beneath the bridge at the time, killing two people. In March, the department of labour issued a statement saying that the inquiry, which was meant to take place in March, was postponed to May 4. This, however, has not occurred. &ldquo;The proceedings that were scheduled from March 27 to May 4 have been postponed due to technical challenges affecting the proceedings.The dates scheduled from May 4 until June 9 will continue as scheduled,&rdquo; the department said. Yet as it stands the inquiry has not yet begun. Department of Labour spokesperson Teboho Thejane told City Press that the inspector-general had given clear instructions that this process must be under way urgently. &ldquo;We are currently coordinating all parties involved as it involves a number of legal teams, some who are outside the country, as soon all parties diaries are synchronised with that of the of the presiding office we will provide a day as human as possible,&rdquo; Thejane said.