The Office of the Chief Justice refused to reveal to Parliament the security measures that were in place in and around its building before the burglary in March &ndash; and would not say much on the effect of the incident on its work. Oddly, the same office was comfortable to share details of the current and improved security, which was upscaled following the burglary and now includes increased patrols, new perimeter fencing and a biometric system.The Office of the Chief Justice appeared before the National Assembly&rsquo;s portfolio committee on justice yesterday to table its annual performance plan and budget for the 2017-2018 financial year.Secretary-general of the Office of the Chief Justice, Memme Sejosengwe, told Parliament that as a result of the burglary on March 18, the office has had to improve its security.She was responding to a flurry of questions from MPs about the incident which shocked the country &ndash; 15 computers containing information about judges and officials were stolen. At the time of the break-in, the office said the theft of computers &ldquo;constituted a huge setback for the entire administration of justice&rdquo;. &ldquo;It was quite a sad incident for us too,&rdquo; Sejosengwe said.She revealed that the South African Police Service responded &ldquo;quite heavily&rdquo; to the incident, upping the security around the precinct and patrolling. &ldquo;We have an agreement with the local Midrand police to make sure that they do that.&rdquo; She said the number of security guards was increased to ensure the perimeter around the building was more secured, with more patrols around the vulnerable hours of the day.The landlord had also committed to changing the security fencing around the building and would replace it with stronger fencing. The exterior lighting had also been improved, she revealed. Sejosengwe said the police had committed to assist with security arrangements because an issue was raised on whether the building should continue being protected by private security or by the police, and whether there was a need to look at it as a national key point. Internally, the office was busy installing extra cameras and a biometric system to improve safety, she said. But she clammed up when the African Christian Democratic Party&rsquo;s Steve Swart followed up, asking whether the office had had CCTV cameras. &ldquo;If you didn&rsquo;t, is that something that&rsquo;s being planned; if you had it, is that being studied for the purposes of trying to ascertain the perpetrators?&rdquo; he asked, saying this was important because at the time of the theft, the office had indicated that the computers contained important information. &ldquo;What have you done in the meantime to mitigate against that huge setback you indicated? Was it only those computers [that were stolen]? Because some people have said this was a direct attack on the judiciary that certain computers were taken and only in human resources,&rdquo; asked Swart.Sejosengwe said she couldn&rsquo;t answer Swart&rsquo;s questions and revealed that she had been advised by acting police commissioner Khomotso Phahlane not to say more about the matter because &ldquo;the more you keep on saying on your side, the more you make this office vulnerable&rdquo;. This included the question of how the robbery affected the administration of justice. She said she could only answer the questions &ldquo;offline&rdquo;. ANC MPs backed her stance, saying it was not necessary to say more.ANC MPs Moloko Maila and Loyiso Mpumlwana wanted to know about the measures taken to make sure the incident didn&rsquo;t happen again. Mpumlwana asked: &ldquo;Was it an inside job? Have you discovered that? I don&rsquo;t mean one of your judges did that...&rdquo; he quipped to laughter in the room, before adding that he was worried the incident could set a precedence of stealing at the lower courts.