The guest of honour didn&rsquo;t turn up. Her replacement also stayed away. But that didn&rsquo;t stop presidential hopeful Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma&rsquo;s supporters from heaping praise on her and promising to turn out in full force when she does eventually come to Limpopo next month.The 700-strong ANC Youth League rally at the Lebowakgomo Civic Centre, which was meant to give weight to her campaign in the province, instead turned into a platform for leaders to rally support for President Jacob Zuma. They warned that those who heckle, boo and criticise him in public would be dealt with severely. ANCYL provincial chairperson Vincent Shoba criticised former finance minister Pravin Gordhan and his deputy Mcebisi Jonas, who were fired by Zuma at the end of March, saying &ldquo;President Zuma made the right decision&rdquo; to sack them. &ldquo;They were out of order and embarrassing the president by defying him. They were disrespecting the president in public and through the media. We want to put to you that we support President Zuma,&rdquo; he said. Shoba also slammed former public service and administration minister Ngoako Ramatlhodi over his recent revelations that, while he was the minister of mineral resources, he had been pressured by Eskom chief executive Brian Molefe and chair Ben Ngubane to favour a company associated with the Guptas and Zuma&rsquo;s son Duduzane. &ldquo;Why is Ramatlhodi talking now? He is bitter because he was reshuffled. Why didn&rsquo;t he say anything while he was still the minister? We want to make it very clear that the ANCYL in Limpopo is not distracted by all the comrades who are gunning for President Zuma.&rdquo;ANCYL provincial secretary David Selane took a swipe at the SA Communist Party (SACP), in particular its general secretary, Higher Education Minister Blade Nzimande.&ldquo;We are not scared of some ministers who like money and flashy cars. We are aware that they are pushing an agenda to oust President Zuma. They are there for blue lights and, when there&rsquo;s war, they run away.&rdquo;He criticised the Limpopo ANC leadership for not attending the event, charging that they stayed away &ldquo;because they don&rsquo;t want to be associated with Zuma&rdquo;.Stan Mathabatha, the Limpopo premier and ANC chair, ANC provincial secretary Nocks Seabi and the rest of the provincial executive committee were not present.&ldquo;We are warning you that snakes will come out from their hiding places because we are going to expose them. They thought that our event would fail, but that didn&rsquo;t happen. Comrade Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma has a funeral at home. She will come back here in the first week of June and some will eat humble pie,&rdquo; he said.He praised Dlamini-Zuma&rsquo;s leadership qualities and pledged that, if the ANCYL wanted her to become president, it would happen. &ldquo;History has proven itself. We chose President Zuma to lead and will choose another leader, and that leader will emerge the victor,&rdquo; Selane added.Umkhonto weSizwe Military Veterans Association provincial secretary Jack Lulamo also added his voice to the chorus. He said his organisation would march to the provincial offices of the SACP and Cosatu to talk to them about the heckling of Zuma and his allies. ANC Women&rsquo;s League president Bathabile Dlamini, who was scheduled to replace the main speaker, also failed to show up. It was reported that she was engaged in a league campaign elsewhere in Limpopo. Eventually, International Relations Minister Maite Nkoana-Mashabane delivered the main speech and spoke about radical economic transformation. But Dlamini-Zuma&rsquo;s mission to Limpopo seems to have been a source of conflict in youth league structures. Earlier, the ANCYL&rsquo;s Collins Chabane subregion described the Lebowakgomo rally as an &ldquo;unofficial gathering&rdquo; that did not have the sanction of the provincial leadership or the league. Selane told City Press that the Collins Chabane structure was &ldquo;out of order&rdquo; and had ceased to exist.