During the long-anticipated medium-term budget, Malusi Gigaba argued that government is about “putting in place the conditions for people to realise their aspirations for themselves”. In this, the finance minister borrowed from the human economy rule book. As academic Keith Hart suggests, human economy aims to “put people first … making their thoughts, actions and lives our main concern”. This is only possible if we engage the society in its impersonal dimensions. Money plays a central role in this mediation. In other words, we need the big money – but this should serve the objective of creating a more equal society. So just how did the budget speech fare in this delicate mediation? About money, the minister suggested that the revenue target this year will fall short by R50.8 billion. By 2022, the government debt to gross domestic product will be 61%. Which is to say, the government will owe lenders the equivalent of about two thirds of the country’s national income. Bailing out parastatals such as South African Airways, South African Post Office, Transnet and Eskom forms an important part of the high government expenditure so far. And looking into the future, parastatals will take 42.5% of government expenditure on infrastructure development. Eskom, the minister said, is too big to fail and government cannot let that happen. Through the whole speech, both Eskom and SAA featured nine times, almost twice as much as poverty and inequality, which were mentioned five times. Eskom will increase its tariffs, and it will receive bailouts in the process. In both occasions, whether directly or indirectly, the cost will be borne by the consumer. The minister also cited that manufacturing is the way to industrialisation for South Africa – and parastatals play an important role in this industrialisation. But since 1994, South Africa’s manufacturing sector has reduced by half if we consider its share of GDP. On taxes, the minister warned that this will be done in a more aggressive way. He particularly faulted corporates that have tended to avoid taxes in their cross border operations. But the 90% of the population who own only 5% of wealth (the human economy) received moderate attention in the speech, with education expenditure and service delivery being relevant interventions. The budget speech therefore was less effective in mediating between big money and the human economy, it focused on the old economic ideas of creating a more functional state and a taxing corporates more effectively. Hardly anybody in South Africa disagrees with the fact that wealth should be de-concentrated from the 10%. We disagree on the means to achieve this goal. The call for a better understanding of the human economy is different from the militant voice of the nationalist left to take wealth by force from the rich to give to the poor. Neither are the redundant debates about state and markets likely to solve the poverty problem. Human economy is also different to Oxfam’s view of timid (and unfruitful) persuasion of large corporations to become more generous with their wealth, as if they are the real economy and everybody else is not. It will serve us well to remember that over the course of the past century, the current economic thought (mainly state and markets debates) presided over two military World Wars and a third economic (Cold) War. And yet the world is more unequal than it has ever been in history, and more than a billion people live in poverty. Reflecting the global picture, South Africa’s inequality is now worse than it was during apartheid, over half of the population live in poverty and close to four in every 10 employable South Africans are unemployed. If two decades of democratic dispensation have presided over increasing inequality, rising unemployment and deepening poverty, then the current thinking about economic development seems bankrupt. A new way of thinking about development is necessary. It seems to me that a call for serious engagement of the economic challenges of a modern society using different theoretical tools is necessary. The old thinking is not just a government problem, it is society wide problem. As the human economy paradigm suggests, perhaps in South Africa we should begin by exploring ways of ensuring that we use big money to scale up community innovations. This is one way in which the aspirations of “the people” could be realised. People are always innovating new ways of survival. The human economy has a lot of untapped wealth, because of our tendencies to focus on maintaining the economic health of large bureaucracies and corporates at all costs. People only lack the resources to scale up their innovations, and if we could recognise this without taking away their agency. The human economy therefore consists of people’s daily efforts to create sustainable livelihoods for themselves. Of course we should not ignore large bureaucracies, they are useful in their own way. But perhaps we need to turn attention to what has always been around us –the human economy, and find ways of using big money to upscale this human economy. • Dr Jason Musyoka is a development economist based at the Centre for the Advancement of Scholarship, human economy programme, University of Pretoria.