The battle for the most-played song over the festive season is on. Michael Chirwa, better known by his stage name Stilo Magolide, is hoping to dominate the charts this December after releasing his new single, Av’Uythanda, which has Gqom beats. The rapper assures City Press that the single is going to be “the best thing in the dance and hip-hop music genre this season”. “It is going to be a great summer jam for clubs and a chilled, party vibe song for fans,” he said. Another hip-hop artist who has recently released an album, Democracy & Delusion, is Sizwe Mpofu-Walsh. Chirwa, a fan of fashion, visited City Press this week. He was accompanied by his puppy, and wore his trademark bling necklaces and rings. You would be forgiven for mistaking him for a US rapper on a visit to South Africa. The singer has collaborated with various artists, including Okmalumkoolkat, Riky Rick, Zingah and Tru Hitz. “I am all about art and fashion because I want to show the world my artistic skills from time to time,” he said, adding that he drew his inspiration from life events that inspired him. For his 2016 music video for the hit single Shukumisa, featuring Riky Rick, the two artists portrayed themselves sporting different looks and living like kings. Chirwa said his fashion style was inspired by daily life and the hip-hop environment. Asked how he prepared for stage performances, he said he hardly did so because “I always vibe well with fans”. “I love being creative in my work and giving my best to my supporters every time I get on stage or meet them on the streets,” he said. This week, the rapper also dropped the visuals for his album single – Sefolosha – online for his fans. On September 8, he officially released his long awaited album named Tropicana Jiiig, which includes hit tracks such as Back to me, which features rapper Anatti, and A minute Featuring Jay Claude. The album has 15 tracks that draw from different genres. He said the crazy hip-hop dance and sound was yet to be given a genre as it was ahead of its time – possibly 2190. Asked what advice he would share with younger musicians, he said hard work was essential and getting music to fans using all media platforms would benefit them. “They must also respect their fans and their work as artists; it helps a lot,” he said.