The Joburg leg of the Migos Culture Tour on Saturday at the TicketPro Dome faced a massive social media backlash due to lengthy delays between artist sets and poor organisation. Mabala Noise released a statement today, citing the weather as a reason. “Just after 7pm on Saturday evening a massive storm descended on Johannesburg, significantly impacting some of the access control points and the electronic accreditation systems.” In the best interests of public safety, the decision was made to pause the live performances “until such time as the access points were operating effectively and the safety of patrons could be assured. The safety of the fans was paramount”. Spokesperson for Mabala Noise, Sikhulile Nzuza thanked all the fans for their support. “We would like to thank all the fans and supporters who came out to The Dome on Saturday to the Migos SA Tour. Irate fans started booing and throwing bottles after a three-hour delay between Riky Rick and Nasty C’s performance. AKA, who was supposed to perform, never went on stage.  People are throwing bottles and booing #migos pic.twitter.com/L7iLjM6T1v   There were also problems with golden circle tickets, with concert goers first denied access as their tags could not get printed, apparently due to poor control and the weather. The Sowetan also reported that agitated crowds outside the venue started pushing to gain entry after being forced to go through at least four sets of security points. Khanyi Mbau was also booed after taking to the stage during the delay and ordering the crowd to move to the left of the stage or they would not continue with artist performances.  we also had to wait for Khanyi Mbau to learn the difference between left and right pic.twitter.com/z4Qrui9Zws   Rumours had been circulating prior to the event that the Migos weren’t going to appear, forcing organisers to send Migos member Takeoff on to stage before their set to prove that they were indeed there. He dashed on and off quickly, saying “we’re here, we’re here!” to set the crowd at ease. “All booked South African artists were backstage and made aware of the situation. Migos went on stage at their scheduled time slot and performed their full set,” the statement said. Migos, who is an American rap trio, comprises Quavo, Takeoff and Offset and is well-known for hits such as their 2013 debut single Versace and their 2016 hit Bad and Boujee. Watch the video here: