Ah, Oppi. The dust, the debauchery, the many-varied headgear people seem to insist on wearing. One thing the festival keeps getting right is its line-up – which is always a mix of established heavyweights and up-and-coming gems. In recent years, more and more black artists have also taken the stage as the crowd slowly becomes more diverse. Here are the five acts #Trending thinks you just can’t miss this year: 1. YoungstaCPT Red Bull Stage Friday, 7.30pm It’s weird that Cape Town rapper YoungstaCPT has been making music for years and yet is always referred to as an “up-and-comer”. This guy is no newbie, and his Afrikaaps raps and incendiary lyrics have lead many to dub him one of the best hip-hop artists in the country. 2. Moonchild Sanelly Red Bull Stage Friday, 8.15pm Did you know that blue-locked Moonchild Sanelly has copyrighted her hair? Now you do. Brazenly sexy and oh-so refreshing, Moonchild is a soulful electronic singer who is most known for her track Rabubi. For supercool laidback funk, Moonchild is it. 3. Thor Rixon Red Bull Stage Friday, 9pm He’s weird, he’s avant-garde, he wears beige body socks and shaves his head in videos. Thor Rixon is a deliciously interesting electronic performer who always delivers on stage. He’ll be a highlight of your festival. 4. Bongeziwe Mabandla Bruilof Stage Friday, 10pm Mabandla has toured all across the world and earned massive success since his 2012 album Umlilo, and yet many South Africans stills don’t know who he is. With his thoughtful Xhosa lyrics and an Afro-Folk sound, Mabandla is a performer that brings a sense of spirituality and hypnotism to his performances. 5. The Brother Moves On James Phillips Stage Saturday, 6pm Now regulars at Oppi, The Brother Moves on is more than just a band. Live, they’re a political performance art outfit that leaves crowds dazzled, managing to touch on themes of inequality, mining, race and masculinity while still being highly entertaining. Don’t skip on these guys. 6. Flume Main Stage Saturday, 11pm Australian record producer, DJ and musician Flume’s sound is sexy, shimmering, synthetic, and undeniably millennial. With songs like Say It featuring Swedish delight Tove Lo and Never Be Like You featuring Kai, Flume has become one of the biggest DJs in the world right now. It’s the headliner for obvious reasons. * Oppikoppi is happening October 5 to 7 this week. Tickets available at plankton.mobi