Finally we get to hear whether Nomuzi Mabena, better known as Moozlie can be considered a solidified rapper. The skhanda queen recently released her mixtape Versus, which she says she recorded during some of her happiest, saddest, most exciting and even angriest days. #Trending spoke to her via email to find out about the project. Where did you record your mixtape Versus? The mixtape was recorded in a couple of different places, most of them at Kool Out studios in Johannesburg with Hopemasta, who did most of the production work on the tape. I also recorded at Gemini Major’s place, Raw X studios, F2D studios which Da LES owns and Playground Productions. One song was even recorded in Victoria Kimani’s hotel room. I wanted to work with different people in different studios so I could not only get different musical vibes but also learn from as many people as possible. How long have you been working on this project? I’ve been working on this project for more than a year. The first single from the mixtape was released in August 2016 and the last song was recorded about two weeks before it dropped. I really took my time with it. I was actually just in studio learning and building and growing as an artist. It was just a true blessing that at the end I was able to put together such a fire mixtape. Who are some of the producers and beat makers you worked with? (Producers names are in brackets) Getting Cash (Syriee & Mordy) Rockstar ft Young Swiss (Hopemasta) Trophy ft Victoria Kimani (Mr Kamera) Bum Bum ft Gemini Major (Gemini Major) Ride or Die ft Yung Swiss (Playground) Mixed Emotions (Hopemasta) Break Up Song (Ceazor VAM) Look Who’s at the Top (Hopemasta) Thini Sizwe (Hopemasta) Relaxxx (Molly 1080) Recipe (Whichi 1080) What inspired you to create and finally release this project? The mixtape is called Versus and I called it that because I think as people, young people especially, we often go through a lot of internal struggles that others may not know about. Whether it’s about love, money, success, our ambitions – there are so many things you need to fight through, often internally, to get to your next level. Versus is a project where I really allowed myself to go through all those struggles instead of just ignoring them and coming out as a better person at the end. Can fans expect a full album soon? I’ll definitely be dropping my first album in 2018, maybe towards the middle of the year. And it will also be released through my label Nomuzi Mabena Music. Why did you opt for a mixtape over an album this time around? I just felt like signing to such a well known hip-hop label [Cashtime Life] right at the beginning of my music career almost catapulted me to the top and I missed a few steps. When I started my own label it was important for me to just go back at learn as much as possible. So I decided to release a mixtape so I could experiment a little bit, see what sounds I’m into and what consumers like and don’t like from me. We really just using this as a big market survey to see how fans are reacting to Moozlie as an artist and the work that the label is doing. *Read the review of Versus in #Trending this Sunday. Download the mixtape for free here www.audiomack.com/album/moozlie/versus