Can you imagine life without your smartphone? Most of us can’t. Our lives have been changed irrevocably by a piece of equipment smaller than a paperback book. Now, imagine a future where the only thing you really needed was your smartphone – no keys, no cash, no handbag or backpack. That future is now. Apple released the first iPhone 10 years ago, and technological innovation in the past decade has led to radical changes for the smartphone. And the tech is about to get even smarter. General manager for the Huawei Consumer Business Group South Africa Likun Zhao said smartphones were about to evolve even more dramatically. “After 10 years of rapid change, smartphones are starting to move from being functional to intelligent phones. At Huawei we are focusing on breaking through the boundaries to launch a new era of innovation.” Core to Huawei’s philosophy is the belief that, while the company can develop the hardware for smartphones, consumers can generate the ideas for the software (including apps) that power these devices. If you are a dentist and hope to diagnose a patient’s aching tooth, what about asking your smartphone? Simply take a picture of the ailing tooth, and your phone will report back. If consumers want to develop apps that can fulfil almost any wish and answer any question, then Huawei is the place to be. This is possible as Huawei has introduced the world’s first artificial intelligence (AI) processor for smartphones. Zhao explained that the majority of smartphone advances have been driven by the “brain”, or computing, of these devices. “Over the past 10 years, the linear computing of smartphones (‘left brain computing’) has been continuously improved. “The ‘right brain computing’, rooted in AI which makes smartphone experiences more interesting, thoughtful and intelligent, is set to radically change the way smartphones evolve as we enter a new era of innovation,” Zhao said. “In the age of artificial intelligence, intelligent devices are becoming an extension of who we are. They provide us with efficient, useful and readily accessible information and services, and offer us more compelling experiences. AI is set to propel the intelligent development of smart devices to the next level. Instead of passively responding to user needs, AI will sense our mood and environment, and proactively offer new ways for us to interact with the world around us through targeted services.” For some people, AI is the bogeyman of technological innovation – the death blow to the human race as robots with minds of their own obliterate or enslave us all (think The Matrix). But for most, AI means the job losses as people are replaced in the workplace by robotic counterparts. Artificial intelligence (AI) is an area of computer science that emphasises the creation of intelligent machines that work and react like humans. Some of the activities computers with artificial intelligence are designed for include speech recognition, learning, planning and problem solving. HOW DOES AI BENEFIT HUMANS? From organising your emails to creating personalised online shopping experiences, AI promises to transform the way we live and work. HERE ARE JUST A FEW EXAMPLES: . Elimination of repetitive tasks The greatest benefit of AI – which is already emerging – is the elimination of repetitive tasks. AI will ultimately help humans spend more time focusing on creative and high-mental-effort activities. . Time savings AI will save companies considerable time by doing tasks and collecting data, as well as providing decisions based on that data. It seems quite possible that AI has the capability of doing so much more than humans can on many levels. . Fewer screens AI will enable us to interact with information as if we’re interacting with a knowledgeable individual. We won’t have to look at a screen to learn about anything, we can simply converse with AI. AI will make it possible for us to do virtually anything with voice command. . Personalised medicine Rather than a one-size-fits-all approach, doctors will be able to tailor treatment on an individual basis and prescribe the right treatments and procedures based on your readily available medical history. . Improved quality of life With AI, we will have better personalised healthcare, more efficient energy use, enhanced food production capabilities, improved jobs with less mundane work, and more. People will lead longer and higher-quality lives. While Zhao acknowledges that some jobs will be lost to AI, he is also absolutely convinced that AI will create a whole new skill set and with that, new jobs. Huawei in China, working with another company, developed an application that could not only record an entire meeting, but transcribe what took place as soon as the meeting ended. No need for anyone to take notes or dispute what they had said. In South Africa, education is an area that could be vastly improved by AI innovation. An example might be an AI app that will be able to monitor the progress of each student in a class; alert teachers to students’ difficulties; and even provide educational material. Huawei just needs a few smart school kids to develop such an app on the company’s open source software. But while AI development has the ability to change lives for the better, it does pose some risks as well, Zhao said. “AI also poses real challenges that can impact lives, including its impact on employment and applications related to security, ethics and privacy. These can lead to legal, ethical, political and religious implications that we must take seriously. We must develop the relevant technical standards, laws and regulations in advance to deal with these challenges,” he said. TALK TO US Have you got a great idea for a smartphone app? Share your idea by SMSing it to 35697 using the keyword HUAWEI. Please include your name. SMSes cost R1.50. Or  email projects @citypress.co.za  